name,responses
Mi,"	I took the post-secondary International Business program. So, it was a college program. And at the same time, it was a full-time study. So, during this program, I didn't have a chance to work, even though I had the chance to get the on campus work permit, but because of the timeframe, it was a really intense program. I didn't have a chance to work with doing this one year period."
Mi,"	Austria. So it was the year was 2008. So, the year after, I definitely wanted to have a chance to experience different cultures. So, I knew that European culture was pretty much the same, especially in the Western Europe. So especially on also the education system was the same. And I wanted to try either Australia, as I mentioned to you before or Canada. So, the main motivation was, of course, as I said, to broaden my horizons, for not just the educational aspect, but just to learn different cultures to engage with different kind of atmosphere. And I think education was good tool to get myself into that door. So, but making the decision specifically Canada, that was one of my father's friend that he's Turkish, but he got married with a Canadian. So yes, so he was highly recommending about going to Canada but he was mostly endorsing about immigration processes more easier in Canada, but I was insisting on the fact that my intention is not the immigration at first place compared to other like the majority of people. So, but he was still insisting on Australia is tough on immigration. So, you better just go to Canada. And, but the motivation was for me to go to Australia. I mean, for me to want to go to Australia was climate. Of course, it was nice climate, the landscape. The culture itself, have it looked from Turkey from my perspective, of course, I never been in Australia before. Yeah, so I made a decision of course with some of the endorsements from my friend. And also, the second part was there was an educational consultancy firm that they came to my campus when I was doing my undergrad in Turkey. And they did a seminar regarding the education institutions in Canada. So, that was also a bit tempting for me how to education system is good in Canada, I mean, compared to Turkey specifically, and it was also different… not entirely different, but there was certain differences compared to Europe. So, in this case, I would like to I just want to decide to move forward with Canada so that was the main reason."
Mi,"	I am Turkish I was born in Turkey and raised in Turkey till 21-year-old. And after 21, I went to Austria, the one without the kangaroos. Yeah, that's the joke actually. So, yes, and 2008 was the year. But also, I have, over there because the international student community was so active, I didn't have a chance to engage with the Austrian culture itself. It was mostly field trips, backpacking and similar things. But other than that, I was mostly melted in the same pot with other international students. So, I think I would say it was a better experience for me because it was an amazing experience in terms of having some friendships from South Korea, from Australia to from US from parts of Europe, from Africa, so it was it was good. I mean, I had some roommates from Ireland and Spain. So, I never had this experience before. And it was teaching me so many things, how to share the common space, how to share different cultures and respect each other in certain terms, even though I wasn't accepting certain things at first place, but it's helped me to absorb and respect them. And then the next stage was to gain some cultural share. So, which was important for me, and then I enjoyed it. I enjoyed that time being and then yes, I decided to take the next step. And that was Canada."
Mi,"	I never thought of it. I taught mostly in Europe, somewhere in Europe. I personally, I like Mediterranean countries because of the climate as well as the culture itself is more welcoming in general, again, it depends on person to person but and also, I knew from my knowledge and as well as some of the Turkish diaspora in Austria and Germany, and I was mostly talking with them day to day basis. So their Austrian experience wasn't that satisfactory in terms of racist behaviour in terms of, in terms of the how the integration process was missing and was not welcoming especially the first generation, the law and second generation and third generation they were partially pushing themselves where I wouldn't want to use ‘pushing’ but they would like to they wanted to try to be part of it. But again, the integration whole in Europe is all different country by country. People were thinking that just because of the common language Germany and Austria have the same kind of integration policy, but I think it's different. I found Germany is more welcoming, especially even though the integration fail. It was accepted by the chancellor. I think it was 2006 that he admitted publicly that integration process failed. But even though the integration process failed, I found during my trips in Germany, and also my classmates that who were from Germany, they were more welcoming, they were more friendly, and they didn't make me feel that I was stranger. But I had, I had two Austrian roommates that we were sharing the same building, but they were not that welcoming. And they were not that friendly. But maybe it's just we can limit for that two people. But in general, even when I was going to the supermarket or when I was going to a bar. It was different. I mean, you could sense that. It was a small town which is called, which is named Kufstein, but it's really closer to the one of the biggest cities in the western side of Austria. It's called Innsbrooke. So it's a 15 minutes difference, as you can imagine the differences in Europe is as I mean distances in Europe is not that huge. And there's a connectivity in terms of the location and the train system. The transportation system is well organized. So yeah, I mean, it was closer also to Munich as well, one of the biggest cities in Germany. So, it was 45 minutes remaining 15 minutes to Innsbrook. So, it was really good in terms of the location… to the Italy border, the Italian border was one and a half hour so it was in the central hub of Europe pretty much."
Mi,"	yes, my at my schoo…l I mean my time being in Austria was finished in May 2008. That was for one year. So, May 2008 I packed my luggage and I had to come back to Turkey. I had a Diploma ceremony for my undergrad so that was… I was busy with all summer regarding this and then also I planned ahead that I needed I needed to apply for certain programs in Canada and Australia as well. So, I decided mostly the Canada as I explained to you earlier and then application process started. And then, sorry, my application process started in my second term when I was in Austria. And then, I applied for. For the program, I got a approval from the program from graduate college International Business diploma program. So, then that was three, four months period that I applied for visa for Canada. I prepared my documentation. And as you can imagine all that preparation to go to a new country like your health insurance or travel insurance and all that. So, then it was 24th August in 2009, and I travelled to Canada, Dallas for educational purposes. "
Mi,"	My professional background, I studied international relations. So, some people think that it's a profession, but an academic field shouldn't be a profession. It's a, it's a different aspect. But in Turkey, the understanding of academics is totally different. They treat the academic programs as a college program, but that's why that's one of the missing parts, my personal opinion that in Turkey, there are some college programs existing but it's not that sufficient or it's not utilize it utilizing it in a good way. That's different topic but to answer your question, yes, I graduated from international relations program, which was in back home in Turkey. But during this summer times, I actually worked in, I wouldn't say work but internships mostly in some firms that was one of them was Hamza bus manufacturing company. I was in their Import Export department because the International Relations graduates in Turkey, they are mostly people, the understanding of this program, when you're working in the field, the field should be in the big companies for corporate environment in their Import/Export department. First of all, they are expecting the fact that your language level I mean, the foreign language, or let's say English, German or Italian, Spanish, whatever that the language that you have. So, they're assuming that you can manoeuvre that process more smoother compared to other administrators. So, we're basically administrator but more and more in a structured format because you have to know the export policy, import policy, and all that. So that was a dimension, but I just wanted to double it also the mandatory on the school that you needed to have that internship during that time frame. So other than that, I didn't have any work experience. So, when I came to Canada, that was my first work experience and that was abroad. So that was the interesting part."
Mi,"	First work experience I, I mentioned to you earlier that I didn't have a chance to work that much at the regular college, during my studies. So that was a point that because of the financial difficulties, I had to find a job and I was working at the Indian restaurant. Yes, it was mostly serving position. And my school was typically ending at 4pm - Everyday Monday to Friday.. it's full time college program. So, as you can imagine, it's not like undergrad or something. So, 4-6, I had two hours difference and I was evaluating this time mostly either feeding myself or reading some materials and then going to the restaurant my shift was starting 6. It was ending at 2am. So that was four hours. But not every day though. I would say the hours were between 20 to 25 hours. And sometimes this restaurant was catering to the to the weddings. So, first time, I had a chance to see some Indian weddings, some Pakistani weddings, so that was fun. That was my first, but it wasn't full time. It was part time. And as you can imagine, as a student, the best way to find employment is hospitality - food and beverage. So, then the first full time experience was again hospitality. That was a Tim Hortons. But again, part of that was, so after my graduation, the process is in Canada, you have to apply for postgraduate work permit. I'm not sure they change that or not, I didn't have a chance to analyse the policy how it looks like but so I applied for this postgraduate work permit, but at that time, the ideal way of getting the Canadian permanent residency. So that was the provincial nomination program (PNP). Okay, so here's the thin line. So I wanted to get the Canadian work experience, but I heard from so many people that if you have just solo work permit, to find a job is really hard, or you can find some certain jobs, but that's not going to be as satisfactory because employers - their perspective is typically you have a work permit, there's a validity for it. So, how can we rely on your work for immigration and afterwards but if Canadian government or Immigration Canada wouldn't like you to continue with you in terms of the immigration process, so this kind of jeopardize situation for employers and also jeopardizing the employees as well. So that's why I was in between to apply the PR or not. So then I decided to move forward to be part of this PR  program, because I wanted to get the work experience here and my program itself after I joined the program, I realized that it's, there's a core program that I also joined core program, I forgot to mention, that was not paid. That was an internship as well. So, my goal again, I was still sticking with the same goal or You got your education in a different country, and you got the North American aspect. And then you can add an additional work experience to real life work experience, and then you can go back home. But again, during this time, it was so tough to find a job that compliments my, my fields like international business and international relations as well. Part of it is education. Credentials back home is not recognized by the employers. It's recognized if it's in English in Canada, that's why they accept you for the next step to be as an international student, as obvious. But - employers they typically rely on your Canadian experience either or the Canadian educational experience. So, and also consider the fact that we look at comparing two cities like Toronto or Vancouver, the job opportunities are really rare. Maybe if I would be in in Toronto or Vancouver, maybe chances would be better. But, again, I was in a position that maybe if I could get my permanent residency, then I will get the real Canadian work experience. So I was in Winnipeg. So that makes it more interesting. So during this time period, either like, okay, so you get your PR, and then you can get the ‘real’ job, but you get the PR, the PNP program. It's a bit complicated. I'm not sure if it makes sense yet. Yeah. So the permission moment of programming still continues right now, but I'm not sure how efficient it is. So, it requires that first of all, you get a job letter from a certain employer. That's not necessarily relevant. Doesn't have to be relevant to your background. But any kind of institution any kind of Corporation, Tim Hortons or Starbucks, or a catering company, any kind of field sector …needs to be full-time. So this job letter and and some other documents that you provide to provincial government and the provincial government may or may not they give you a certain credential that okay you're approved for the nominate program and the next step is to apply for the federal program which is the permanent residency."
Mi,"	Not Express entry, it’s the PNP. I'm not sure that it was existing at that moment. I don't want to mislead your research, but it's definitely it's definitely worth to take a look at it because we are talking about here 2011 that I applied. Sorry, that's correct. So 2011, it's worth to take a look, if there's express entry in Canada.. So during this time, I was working at Tim Hortons, but also, I was an entry level. So if I was a storefront, they name it. But also it was the suggestion of the employer that you were suggesting me if we will put you on a spot to be in the management. So, your approval from the federal would be more easier. Because you'll look like you're more skilled and it could correlate, or it could it would complement your international business diploma because you're somewhat doing the business management. Yes. So that made sense for me. And it put me in the management program, and I've worked there for entirely three years. And because the process takes took three years, and unfortunately, during this process, you're not, you don't have a chance to change your job. So that was the, that was the process. And even I got some job offers during this time, but, but I couldn't I couldn't change it."
Mi,"	So I think it was… it also overlaps the idea of ‘going abroad’ and moving to Canada. So specifically, just to answer your question about Canada, I would say six to eight months, but going and living abroad. I wasn't sure I will live entirely all my life. But just to have the taste of that. I think that was always on my mind. Since the elementary, because I always thought that the territories are something that we didn't create. So, I wouldn't I didn't want to limit myself in a certain boundary. I knew that there was always more to explore. Yeah, so that was just my way of understanding, as a word citizen or you can name it in a different way. But Yeah, that was this idea was always there but specifically for Canada I would say six to eight months, but it was mostly the mental preparation for - I mean just googling, doing some research about the climate first thing, and some other things the job opportunities, the culture itself, the education system and so on. Whatever you can imagine, I tried to do the research as much as possible and also the fact that I am as I mentioned to you earlier, the educational consultancy firm, there are also somewhat helpful in terms of mapping it out what would be the ideal Canadian experience - that they were not sufficient in sufficient in terms of how to you know how to prepare fully, because they were get imagination was or the their way of endorsing this imagination was mostly a ‘Canadian dream’. Even though that the process of getting your work permit process of getting a PR from the residency that was totally different than whatever they told me and whatever I experienced here because they were generalizing and putting in a different format for every single person, but they didn't mention about the difficulties or they didn't mention about the cons. So they were, they were mostly focusing on just the business part rather than this person is changing his entire life. They're not talking about the career, we're not talking about life here. So unfortunately, I would say a mental preparation was four to six months and between, I would say the next 2, 3 months it was mostly the documents and preparation, documents preparation, some bureaucratic preparation, but the mental preparation was, I would say four to six months, but the entire preparation process was six to eight months. "
Mi,"	No, that's another part that it's a complicated part. So, I decided to work in the marketing sector. So, I was really interested in the marketing inside the business spectrum, Business School spectrum. So, I decided to look for certain jobs but then I found a media integrated specialist position, which  was focusing on advertisement and marketing. It was an entry level position. And then I gave my previous knowledge to Tim Hortons. I was assistant manager at that time by the way. And they offered me being a store manager, but I certainly didn't want to move forward with hospitality because it was enough in terms of the difficulties and plus, I wanted to try more. I wanted to get a different insight, a different part of the business. And then I got this job at a different company - this is still in Winnipeg. I dis this job almost six months and then I was doing good in the company. But what happened was, there was a family emergency my mom had a stroke and she had the open-heart surgery. So, then I had to move back. And I had to give my notice of emergency. And they kept my job for a while. But after a certain period of time, of course, I totally understand the fact that they couldn't keep my position. And so that was a time that year.. 2015, February, I decided to move back to Turkey, not permanently, not definitely, maybe indefinitely. So, it was a big question mark. It was just an emergency purpose. And I didn't know, I didn't plan the rest. So that was the heartbreaking point in terms of not having the full taste of Canadian experience at that time. I didn't even know what was gonna be my future. Yeah, at that time. So then we've been 2015 February till 2016 October, I had my Turkish experience, I worked in two different jobs. One was the logistics coordinator in an international firm and the other one was, I was the procurement specialist. So I was mostly working in the agricultural company that they were important to exporting and they were actively participating in the tenders of United Nations and I was also working in the tender department as well. So, it was a well-paid job considering the fact that the standard of living in Turkey and some other factors, but after my mom's health was getting better, I offered my family to move entirely to Canada. I didn't want to limit their time being here because I offered them even six months in and out Not because of the policies or procedures, because I knew that, because of their age because of their cultural background, maybe they wouldn't be a good fit. Or maybe they wouldn't have a taste of Canada. Maybe they wouldn't like to be here. So that's why I suggested be with me six months or four months, whatever. And then you can go back to Turkey, we can maybe get a mortgage here or I can settle here because I definitely, I mean, doing this one and a half year in Turkey, I decided to move to Canada entirely, and I want to settle here. That was that, that tangible and concrete way of thinking that I would settle here. So that was a time, because of the economy, part of it, it's the polarized society. I didn’t want to live in a polarized society. I didn't want to live in a society that that people are judgmental about certain things, and I'm still not sure if running away or leaving the country is a good choice? As an individual, maybe it's a good choice. But if you're thinking more of a, because I love my country, I think that individuals can create certain environment that it would definitely impact your campaigns. But sticking with the subject, yes, that was a time that I decided to move back to Canada and because of the job opportunities, potential job opportunities, I wanted to come to Toronto so year 2016 October, I came to Toronto from Turkey this time "
Mi,"	Sure, that's a good question. I think I have Okay, this is a I want to start from this story… When I was seven, eight years old. I saw footage on the TV. That that was. That was a topic that some anchor-man they were discussing about what's happening in Bosnia war. So, I was seeing a truck that it was saying UN - the United Nations. I didn't know what it stands for. So, I was asking my parents, they didn't speak English, of course, they didn't know. And they figured out that they probably bring some food. And that says Un in Turkish Un, it's a flower. Yeah. So they kind of correlated to that. I said Wow, that's nice. What are they doing? They said ‘Oh, they're helping people that were actually suffering from war. So then I started with dig deep about UNICEF. What they are doing, I didn't have any knowledge now reach like 10-11 years old. I told my parents that I want to work for UNICEF. I want to help children, I want to, I want to be part of the community that whoever is suffering from war from certain difficulties. I want to be helpful because if I'm not going to be helpful, what is the purpose of my entity in this world, my existence in this world, that's a different way. We can discuss later What is the purpose of being present in this world. That's a different topic, but I wanted this and funny enough, I chose international relations and then I was more involved in certain cases, theories, how it was helpful, or it wasn't helpful to interpret certain situations. And then I found myself in this job, In business kind of field, which I don't like because there's no human touch, in my opinion, I think. You can, you can actually covered it, or spice it up with a more humane touch. It is totally up to you. We don't need to, I don't need to put it as an excuse. But I think how I can bring my economic experience and my undergrad experience with the business. First of all, I have a, I have a theory I have the idea of major research paper. So, which I'm thinking about how the business class immigrants, they switch from business class to different streams. Either being an entrepreneur in the entrepreneurship program in Canada, or they go different streamlines because they don't have the channel that they can actually continue in that channel. And actually apply their, their experiences, right? So, I'm thinking about doing a research about their experiences, their difficulties, specific before that was, and also what are the challenges and how to overcome it. That was my idea. But once I'm getting into more and the program, I'm seeing and getting influenced by different kinds of ideas, ideas that are right now, so I might not stick with that idea in terms of my major research paper, but just to answer your question more clear. I think with my, with my business skills, I will I wouldn't just name it just administrative and also some marketing skills, but you can just put a bit from here and there and kind of make it a big, big impact on your future skills. But again, it's so limitable. It's not that why I mostly feeding myself from my international relations background and my interest in that field, even in the in the class discussions, I'm seeing myself more confident, not because of my business background, but because of my international relations background. So what I want to do with this field, unfortunately, I can put my business skills, mostly maybe into the presentations because I learned a lot in the program, or my, my dialogue skills or maybe administrative format, when I'm preparing or writing a paper because in the undergrad level, you have some short term limits that you can go beyond, but International Business program it gave me an understanding….I was involved in so many different marketing research projects. So that gave me an understanding of how to do research. How you can excel to a point that you can be successful in your future endeavours. So I think that could be helpful in that sense. But compared to my undergrad and business, post-secondary degree, the book will be helpful but in different ways, it's hard to tell how it's going to help me. It is more hybrid. That's, that's good way of explaining that. So, but in future, I would like to work in an NGO, or I would like to stay in academics, if that will be able to position, if there will be any sort of day. I know, it's really challenging, and it demands so much from an individual. I would love to do that either stay in academics or working for an NGO. In this case. I don't want to actually be in specifically Canadian settlements, sector. I don't want to just file the papers and just check the policies. I think that I, I can do more. The more is? It's a good question. It is it is really. I mean, I think certain things, for example, helping someone's paperwork in the settlement sector, or trying to figure out what's the what's missing policy in here, or what kind of policies we can implement in this case? That's totally valuable. I understand. But yeah, I'm not trying to degrade the value of it. I totally respect that. But at the same time, if I can stay in academics, I can try to see what are the missing parts in the policies"
Mi,"	Now … temporary foreign workers. Yeah, it's a big time. I mean, I was reading an article referring. She She has a Filipino background. And she was focusing on the temporary foreign worker program and how Filipino migrants actually suffered from it. She had a focus group and everything. So, first of all, it's good to start this four years in, and four years out policy. It was it was totally endorsing the fact that there's a Canadian dream, come here, work for four years, but at the same time, that the officials they were doing numerous trips, from Alberta, Saskatchewan from different provinces, Manitoba as well, that they didn't actually fully explain in the thesis. That's what it says. They didn't fully explain what the pros and cons are, they were mostly talking about pros like a salesperson. I mean, we need to explain that first. So four years in four years out policy is once you are accepted as temporary foreign worker. So, the policy was, I'm not sure if it still continues the same way. I think government, Immigration Canada was trying to do some adjustments or they were discussing about that, I'm not sure if it's an act right now or if it's a policy change on the table. But once you're in the four years, you allowed to work 4 years and after your for your duration is expire, then you have to leave the country. That's what the program says, but what actually this program led these workers because they created an environment here they created a belonging here. So they want to find a way to apply for for permanent residency. So, at that time PNP program was a good way of finding that channel. Mostly It started with the seasonal workers. So speaking of skilled classification, yeah. That definitely is related with this temporary foreign workers. So, they are typically mostly the temporary foreign workers, they were low skilled. And most of them, they wanted to stay in Canada. So, they either went for PNP, or they were looking for a sponsorship. But the sponsorship as you can imagine, directly from an employer, it was so rare. But mostly it was the PNP programs that they were finding a way to get their permanent residency."
Mi,"	Sure. So my parents are still alive and Scott, and I have an older sister. So she is 16 years older than me. So I'm 33 years old now. So she's almost 50 I guess, 48. She had no influence or no endorsement in my immigration, migration process. But mostly, my father was a pro. My mom was against.. She was looking at the things more in a sentimental way. And I totally feel for her. And it is a tough decision to leave the country, to leave your family. But my father, he was looking at things more pragmatic way, because he saw that in me that this is what I wanted to be and I would be unhappy to live in the country, live in Turkey. Because of so many reasons, as I explained to you the polarized way of society and the economic situation, yes, I would probably. I'm just imagining myself what would happen if I wouldnt come to Canada Do you think that would be a good way of explaining? I will probably get married in my early 20s. And I would have children right now because of the societal pressure, time pressure, family pressure? It is still there. When we are skyping, they still endorsing the idea of like, when are you getting a married? When are we going to have the children on our hands?, and I'm just saying that I have goals once I finish these goals, and then when they accomplished then my first of all, is not going to just get married -  to find the right person. Marriage is just a paper. The system certificate, interestingly a certificate so accomplishing something of some sort. They do they certify you. So I just don't understand this notion. I never understood. So they are more conservative in terms of the traditional way of living, or being an individual. But I'm not entirely thinking the opposite, though. But most of the things that we don't agree, but I think, in family if you find the right way of putting the dialogue, I think they're going to understand you don't need to fight they don't need to. You need to just empathise yourself. Empathy is the key. So then that works. They don't understand me sometimes. I didn't understand them, but I'm trying and then they started to try my position. So, once I'm explaining what I'm going through and what I went through as I explained everything all the immigration process. Now they value it, and they justify it, my situation that why I'm not rushing, or quitting a job. Yeah. But yes, mostly father was abroad during this immigration process. Mom was against and and the sister was neutral."
Mi,"	Can I map it out in terms of the emotions as well?  Can I draw two tables which was Austria and Canada? Okay, let's put this…So the first one I'm putting as figure one, which is going to be the Austria visa process because there was only one visa, so there's no need to explain other which is simple. Figure two is going to be a little bit complicated. I would like to start with Austrian one because the experience was. So, I think in every single, I mean mostly the westernized countries, their requirements are so detailed. So, I would say this is I would say, stress level. The most two things that I would name is during these visa processes, one is the stress level in terms of emotion. And one is that the work that you put, so I would say the efforts/time. It's gonna go the same way I guess okay so the stress level was not too much because it was educational purpose. I knew that it was going to end really, really soon but the effort and time, European Schengen visa is really demanding, but the stress level Let's just say one to 10 – I would put 4. Stress 4, effort 9. So again 1-10. I would just kinda put here in detail - Study permit. Okay in this case let's put it this way. So Schengen visa process, let's say study permit. So study permit was again one to 10 I would say, because, okay, this is kind of different. The stress level was a little bit less again. I would put 2. OK, because, so the paperwork process for Austria was handled by myself, but the paperwork process in Canada, was handled by that consultancy agency. So, and they're actually they helped me out a lot with that, of course I paid to him. So that's why I knew that they guaranteed the approval is going to be there, you're I mean, you're eligible for so many things, so everything will be fine. So that's why the stress level was not that much, and effort was not that much. So, I would put 4 and 2. Just gathering the documents was a bit tough. "
Mi,"	She offered like I was overall three and a half years, almost four years. But she offered me in the middle of this time frame. I mean, two years. When we were two years together, she offered me she said, You don't need to go through this process. You can just handle everything more smoothly. But I refuse. I refuse that. Again, this is this is really complicated because if you really don't feel that this is the right thing, because some people, they just rely on this, and I didn't want to do that. It wasn't voluntarily some people just, you know, offer some sort of money or internal arrangement. They call it fake marriage, but it wasn't fake. It was real that at the end proves that we are not together anymore. So, I was right. I was right. Okay, so seven, stress level was nine. And the last one will be the citizenship. Yes, I already applied for my citizenship. I pass the knowledge test, I'm just expecting the oath, the ceremony. So, the time that I pass the knowledge test, it was 29 April this year. So, they literally talked to me about the timeframe between six to six months, six months to One year. So, we will see how that goes. It's already five months past, I have no rush. I think the stress level is really low because after this process, it lowers. Its smooth. So, I would say to and the effort again, I got, I was busy at that time, and I got some help from an immigration agency that they prepare those documents. So, I would say after that time, maybe 4, so two and four."
Mi,"	Heavily heavily… and I know mom praise Steve Jobs,Bill Gates a lot… because the communication tools are there. But apart from that I actually use technology for my research or to seek certain things even in the city - what kind of gigs what kind of events, even during my time being in Canada too so yes. So maybe you can categorize it and…Connection is one thing. You use technology, mostly, heavily right? So, communication. So, this graph is going to be the first one and use of technology category. So, the first one we will do is the communication. So in communication is I would say mostly I was communicating with, of course, friends and family. So I don't have that much connectivity with their relatives so I would just use categorize them. So, one to 10 scale - So mostly friends were four or five. Lets say four. And family was nine."
Mi,"	It was mostly at that time Skype. Skype is the tool. Yeah, we're not talking about right now we're talking about the most used one is Skype, okay? Because there was no tools whatsapp, viber, no smartphones. Smartphones were there, but this is the beginning, he parents were not able to utilize. This we will call research again specifically for gigs, some events, conferences, which is rare and but it happens if it interests me and then… so research. So, I would say let's categorize this on to So, okay. One is as the Google using as a tool and one is the email endorsement. So it's about, let's say platforms. So, which means sometimes there were some common platforms that people were sharing ideas, gigs and all that. And you already subscribed into it, and then you automatically get email subscriptions, and some weekly newsletters. And one is like, just randomly searching. what's what's going on in the city. So, I would say equal measures. I would say 6 and 6. And the reason that I'm saying Six not because of it doesn't represent the interest level of using the technology but also represents that this may be the rest of 4 that we didn't include, it was endorsed by friends or word of mouth. So, I didn't need to use technology haven't had that much because Winnipeg is a small town. I started to use technology more when I was in Toronto. So word of mouth, it really works in terms of like, how you accommodate yourself in the Winnipeg lifestyle. Because mostly the school platform, I don’t remember the name exactly, but it was school graduates or alumni. "
Mi,"	I can recall that so you read my mind. So, my my ex partner, she was really helpful mentally. And she was born and raised in Canada, but she put so much effort in to understand what I'm going through. She was always there when I had those stressful times. She was trying to give me that comfort zone by activities, by trying to help me to engage with the environment because I guess this emotional connectivity she wanted me to stay there. So, she didn't want me to leave. That's why I've actually made community like, she didn't want me to leave. And also that's why she wanted me to. She offered that getting Let's get married. And let's go through the citizenship process more, more smooth. But because I had the the military service obligation at that time, back in Turkey - I didn't obey that, by the way. So, we didn't need to, we don't need to add it into the map. So I paid 6000 American dollar at that time, and just to waive it. So, in this case, I would be exempt from military service. So that was one question on my mind and plus Winnipeg itself. If I would like to have a Canadian experience, I didn't want to settle in Winnipeg specifically for my entire life. But at that time, she was showing the signals that…the family was there part of her family. And have she had a secure job. And she wanted to. She wanted me to stay. And she was thinking that Winnipeg would be the place to settle. But I wasn't agreeing on that term. And but regardless, she was really helpful I could her. I would name my father that - he was so supportive. And also, I would mean a close friend that became to Canada together. He was… just because he was in the process. He was so helpful, when the times that I was hesitant about if I would actually put my energy to stay in this country, or I would maybe go back. So, he was kinda lifting me up. So that was so helpful. So would name three people and I guess you're asking it to map it out there. Let's use a different model. I would but with all due respect to my father, he was not there with me physically. So physical connectivity is important, I would put first. I can name her. Well there you go. Ex-partner. The second person would be my father even though he was not there physically but mentally he was day to day, sending messages asking me how am I doing it?, if I need something. So he was there. He was there. And, I can name it as best friend. He moved to Saskatchewan. He's actually he wants to bring his, his brother for his master's. So I think I can name some people in terms of personalities, but also Manitoba start-up. There were two agents there. They were so helpful. They were so caring. They were easily empathising with your situation. And I think their psychology background is so strong that personally I'm not sure. That's what my observation is because they will easily empathise, they weren't looking at you as a case or as a client or just a, just a person. They really can do that. You are a person that trying to find a way to robust your situation here without suffering. So, they were definitely helpful. Yeah, they were so explanatory in terms of the process in terms of even the single boxes in the form that… what to write, what not to write, the due dates, they were so cautious before. So hopefully they are in a good position or not even maybe in the same organization. So 2 agents, I would say."
Mi,"	So, of course the work permit and PNP part. This is the first one.  I'm mixing the colors because just to be just a little more visible. This is the second. This is third. This is 4th. This is for because that's the last stage. I had not much doubt about certain things and I wouldn't want to include Austria because that was a different kind of category. So, for this one [work permit] the most challenging one was uncertainty, the Psychological part, whether you will get it or not. So heres the same [PR], I would say, the psychological factor whether you'll be able to obtain this is the PR or your status or not. So, the PNP and as well as the PR process, it is so connected, interconnected. So, it is hard to, to differentiate from one to each other in terms of psychological. You still feel the stress level. Here just basically you’re in a situation that is your fingers are crossed and you’re just waiting. Can I just make a correction? T his is 2011.  So, the process was, I mean, the PR process was not that long, because each province has different responses. If you're in Ontario, at that time, the process took longer. But in promises like my intro by Saskatchewan, I think the number of applicants, one of the main reasons, is more low compared to the Ontario or bigger provinces as BC. But I think it took two years, two and a half years after I applied for PR. I was on work permit and I had to work in the same employer, even though I got some opportunity to explain that to you. So that was the painful part. In daily basis, let's say you have the moments that you really don't think that this job is not a good fit for you and you have an alternative, but you cant evaluate that alternative because of your complicated situation, status situation. So that was really difficult. And this one was just that just the duration because I think lately what I heard the processing times are getting longer and longer. Yeah, even the Canadian citizenship. So I would just say I think that the duration of the process. This one is more more psychological rather than psychological. It's more….it is kind of psychological but it is more of a, because the cultural fit is gonna to be there or not?. So I would say unknown or uncertainty. Sure, cultural connectivity? I don't know if I just put it in the right way, but yes, there's the uncertainty of cultural connectivity. So, Which means will you have a culture shock? Or Is it the right decision? What is expected of me? What kind of difficulties I will face? It is kind of routing to cultural connectivity still. Let's say it my first year in Canada. So that's going to give you an idea. Yeah. So, I'm gonna put it in the behind, okay. First one year. So, again, we're going to rely on our fancy graphs. This is let's say, time. For the sake of me just try to figure it out because I need time and satisfaction? slash engagement. So, of course the first six months, there's a rapid increase because everything is new, you wanna explore everything. You're not getting homesick. From zero all the way up. Even though I was new, the climate was challenging, but everything was new and I'm a person - If I fail or if I just don't let certain things. I'm not a person that I used to blame myself about my choices, but I don't do that anymore. Because you never know without trying. But after six months there’s a dip. You start to feel homesick, criticism on certain things which is comparing traditions. I put criticism here because it might be sometimes rough, especially in my age at that time, It was hard for me - rather than accepting I was criticizing, And it turned to a comparison. Like why! I was criticizing mostly the lifestyle because in Turkey our lifestyle is more laid back. Not into this is a modern capitalist way of melting our lives in. For example, first time in my life I saw a drive through. I had never seen a drive through. Just sit down - you enjoy your meal you have a nice conversation you take you take your time and you actually give the value to the food. Again this is just the the comparison, the personal comparison for the food – the food itself, and the food culture and how do you value the food. And the advantage part of Toronto, which I didn't have the advantage that much in Winnipeg, like, there are tons of different restaurants that represents different cultures, different cuisines. And then questioning, pros and cons of staying. And then it stopped. The reason that it stopped and it's a more stable line, because first of all, you're making a decision. This time, and also it doesn't the decision that you make it is not helping you to increase the satisfaction level but at the same time you're accepting the situation. It's more like an acceptance rather than making plans. So the program itself that the PNP or other programs, it's not a satisfactory and you know the pros and cons pretty much by reading it, by hearing from other people's experiences, how it takes such a long time to invitation and all that. But by accepting the fact that if you really want to stay, and this is the route, take it or leave it. So that's why you somewhat, your plans are becoming more concrete but at the same time, it is helping you to go up or down, it is more like stable. So I think the first year is really important. That's why I just wanted to evaluate this year. And plus, it's easy to remember. That's why I don't want to go further about  second, third etc.. But I think this will be helpful to understand my first year experience."
Mi,"	I do. I do. I had, especially after 2015 coup attempts in Turkey. Turkey is highly polarized. And the young professionals I mean, young professional friends, that which they have skills. I wouldn't want to name it low skilled\high skilled school because that's the comparison what Canada does but I would say skilled. I value all the workers in a different sense. As you can imagine, that's I just done different kinds of jobs within sectors. There's no low skills or high skills. They are just skills. You just have the skills and you can reflect it to certain things. So, my friends were asking about what are the pros and cons of the immigration to Canada? So, my answer was, I kind of wanted to get away from giving a solid answer. I don't want to mislead people. But one thing that I was just sure making them understand the situation and then the process. I said the first thing, it's not easy. It will never be easy in the in the short run, and hopefully things will change in the long run, but and I said, Okay, depending on their age, I was asking them you need to sacrifice certain things and these things are family, these things are the job that you might not integrate your skills very well. And you have to maybe work, you might have to work in different kind of sector, different kind of jobs. And you might have to get used to a different culture, the food itself, not just the food, even the communication level of people. And something that you get used to that back home that maybe it's intimate, maybe that will be offensive to different business. So, you might have to get yourself into certain situations that, it's a huge sacrifice. And you only live once. If you're looking from this perspective, is that worth it? I mean, you have to just ask yourself this question, instead of asking me that, is that worth it? So these are the things these are the tools that I'm giving it to you. If you're asking details, I can provide you the details and I can give you the certain links that you can use search for your research. But yeah, I rather just reflect the question back. These are the things that you should expect if you come here, give or take. So, are you ready? Are you ready to sacrifice?. And then their enthusiasm level is going down and they're like, okay, I better maybe dig deep and take a look at it. And I'll get back to you if I need some sort of advice from you. And they typically don't get back to me. I'm not sure if I do the right thing or wrong thing, but I just want people to understand that this is not something like you’re ready for a backpacking trip. And you should understand that once they come here, they come here with certain burdens, financial burden on their shoulder, maybe they sell their car, their house, it's a big change. So, who am I to actually tell people that, yeah, you should come to Canada, you're going to be wealthy or rich, Canada is waiting for you. No, they need to be aware. So that's why I'm being so cautious when I'm giving them direction. I wouldn't call it giving them direction, I would call them just putting everything on one basket and making sure that the knowledge basket is full and they're picking the one that they need. So, I don't want to give the wrong direction. Because there's no wrong or right direction. It's everybody's own direction. So that's why I'm being really careful. But answering your question. Yes, time to time and they're asking me those questions. For education, it's a different aspect. I definitely endorse the education. I'm just telling them, look either for or learning a new language or if you want to get the post-secondary. If you want to get the post graduate experience, it's worth it. It's worth it. Because of these these reasons, yeah. But if you're just purely about to come to Canada, just for immigrating or settling, it's not easy. It's a long process. So, take the baby steps and think about it. "
Mi,"	One thing that I really like to do is when you are so connected with the work environment in Canada and you just have some other priorities to settle and earn, you let go of certain things like traveling, or participating in certain things because it all comes with the certain financial requirements, right?. So, first of all I want to value give the value to it. I want to enjoy what's actually in Canada. That's one part and… but before that I want to finish my, my school. I want to get my degree and I would like to concentrate on how I can fit myself into either academic environment. Or, as I told you working in a meaningful NGO that I can actually put my skills, learn more, gain more, give more. So that's my goal. Specifically, for Canada. Yes, I would like to live in this country. This country is great. I mean, but the experiences are great because we cannot blame either people or culture or physical things. The system has so many missing points. We all agree with it and officials agree with it especially after post 911 they increase securitization and migration regimes, border regimes and everything. It got to a point that stereotyping is so easy, visualization so easy. Unfortunately, as we talked before, taking part in, in in certain environments is not that easy, because there are certain barriers, especially workplaces diversity wise. Yes, yet, compared to other countries Canada is well diverse, but we have to actually fulfil this diversity as we talked before, so that's why I just really want to want to be …want to access certain things that I can fulfil my desires. At the same time I would like to have a good network in here that, which I've already started and I'm building that out which is good to take it to the next level but I cant just commit myself either living in Canada entire my life for going back to Turkey. I cant commit to this because you never know. You never know but I certainly think that there are so many opportunities here that I can take. And in the short run, and between the short and long run, I will definitely see myself I see myself to leave here and take advantage of everything but this is life as as my time being the gap between 2015 and 16. Sometimes things happen and life taught me that. Even though your desire is to be here, sometimes the circumstances put you in that spot. But in normal circumstances, yes, this country can give so much and I can also give so much that this country has got. "
Mi,"	I think buying a house doesn't make sense, especially this in this. Yes, in this market prices. It doesn't make sense but of course in the future. But again, to to give to sacrifice so much from your life, to make a property meaningful, I think it doesn't make sense to me. I mean, the condition that the mortgage is important. I see some people that they are working for the mortgage for their entire life, but you only be once. How does that make sense? Instead maybe depending on the circumstances maybe buying your land and building my own house that's more meaningful. But again, it depends. So, of course, I would like to get married, again that the marriage meeting that doesn't mean a certificate. Just to get connected with someone forever, because I know some people that they are actually married in paper, but they're not connected. So, living separate lives. I don't want that type of relationship. So, it shouldn't be based on satisfying sexual needs. It should be based on connectivity, chemistry, and you should have your own space at the same time, which means we need to respect each other's space and also share and build something together."
Mi,"	I used to meet people that were that was at the birthday parties or events. Also, like occasional because I'm really open to talk every single person, it doesn't mean that. You know, you're asking for a date or something. But yeah, definitely, just uh, I don't think that the using the online tool Is this helpful. I tried five years ago, but it wasn't working, the online dating. It's so shallow and because you already… I'm not sure how to… I'm sure there's a sociological pathway behind it. But first of all, you're judging them by physical attributes. That's how you say yes. I think so not so many people reading the profile descriptions of that specific person. And when you meet there's a certain shy border and there's no uniqueness. Because everything is all structured. I think there was a documentary in Netflix about this, this topic. It was actually I'm just trying to remember the name of it. Black Mirror. There was an episode that. So that's a good one. "
Sh,"	I think the main attraction was that they were giving a permanent residency like I was a US on work visa. To get a green in US for Indian National…according to some timelines, it's gonna take like 150 years. Yeah. So I can explain you why is that but that was the main reason. I would have never got a green card in US. So Canada was giving permanent residency easily so that’s the reason I moved here. So they have a country wide quota. They give green card from a pool of 7% of  the population from a particular country. So because India has a huge population, their dates are like...So, they are still giving green cards to people who applied in 2008-2009 from India, but for other countries like Pakistan, Nepal ,and Sri Lanka, they get it in one to two years. So that’s the flawed system that they have, especially Indian, Chinese and Filipinos are the most affected because of the number of people applying. So they have a cap of 7%.. So 7% of the green cards – they will give to a particular country. So that’s where the challenge is. "
Sh,"	So there is a difference. In the US, the salaries are much higher, much higher than Canada. It's like less expensive there because of the city that we were living in but generally the taxes are less. So I would say the health care expensive there. But otherwise everything is cheaper compared to Canada. "
Sh,"	I lived in multiple cities so I studied at Buffalo. Then I lived in Texas for some time. I lived in Indiana, Indianapolis thats like closer to Chicago. Those are the major cities I lived in. "
Sh,"	So I would say, like, six months. That’s what it took me for moving to Canada, like I had to do the IELTS exam, then create my express entry profile and submit all the documents. Once I had my profile, it took me 2 and a half months for the final approval. And then I got my PR cards. Then I moved here in Feb 2018 so for the initial six months I was still going to the US for work, like I’d go on Monday and come back on Thursday. Yeah so I was still doing that for like six months but from October last year, I got a full time job in Toronto so im based here. "
Sh,"	Yeah, I could have continued working there on work visa but there are a lot of restrictions on the work visa. Like, when you're switching from one company to another company, you need to redo the process again. They are increasing their timelines for giving you approval for your work visa. And then like, if your visa is expired, your driving license expires as well so there are a lot of implications that comes when your expires. And then my wife, she did Masters in US as well. Unfortunately her visa was not fit for H1B so she had to quit her job. So she was on a student visa and she was working on her student visa. But she was not from stem background. So she gets only like one attempt at H1B and her visa was not in the lottery. So they have like, I think they allocate 5000 visas, and they’re like 250k people that apply for them, Right? So like one out of to get like 40% john 30% chance that will be picked in the lottery. So it's not skill based. It's actually lottery based. Yeah its luck based. So she did her Masters. But she couldn’t get a work visa. "
Sh,"	Yeah. They were supportive. So I went out from India for work. So ofcourse, they were not paying anything and I was getting paid to move.  But then when I had to move to US, I had to take student loan.  But because I had worked in Singapore for some time, I had saved up some money for my education."
Sh,"	No that was not the plan. I was planning to work in India and then study in India and do my MBA in India. But then I got an opportunity to work in Singapore. So I moved there and after moving there, I realized I cannot stay here for long. Like it’s a place where you can stay for one or two years not longer than that. It’s a very small country. There are very limited job opportunities there. Salary wise, It's like, not too much and the work culture as well, Its like, I felt I cannot stay there for long...like I don’t have a long term instinct for staying here.. So what next, so that’s where the US came in. "
Sh,"	No, I didn't have an agent. I so this was something called Canada visa forums. So I used those forums to get all my knowledge and information. They were they helpful."
Sh,"	So we did the same thing like hired a consultant back in India again, again, and she was in India when we were doing this process. So you give your GRE, you give your TOEFL. So she had to go through thw whole thing and again applying in multiple universities and then you get an admit. Like I've lived in so many cities, Toronto is where I can say okay, this is such a good diverse city. I really like it actually. It's very, very nice. Like, we were married for like four years in US. But we had a baby only when he moved to Toronto just in last one years because we feel like this is a place where we can settle down. "
Sh,"	Okay, so yeah, I mean, again, for doing research about the US universities, I did a lot of online research. I joined some Facebook groups. So those groups were, like specific to those University. So they were so it was mainly for Indian students. So Indian student organizations would be there in each university. They would interact with the aspiring candidates and help them in making a decision as well. So Indian Student Associations at universities. So they helped in settling as well. Like when you arrive at the airport, someone will come to pick you up and they will help you get a room as well. So I mean you need to pay for it but at least someone is showing up at the airport in a new city, new country at odd hours during the night, and then they give you like initial accommodation for a week. So they will arrange accommodation with another student who would keep you in your in their house for the week until you find your own accommodation. And take you around Walmart and all, help to buy stuff and help get a phone connection, everything so they actually help you during the first week. The expectation is that once you become a senior you will help other students too. So Canada visa forums is where I got most of the information from starting from how to take the IELTS exam, how to do WES degree verification. Luckily like because I did my masters in us I didn't have to get my Indian degree verified otherwise in getting my Indian degree verified would have been a big hassle…sending my documents from India to US. "
Sh,"	Oh, yeah. So that was part of post ITA… like when we did our medical. We had to get police check done from India, Singapore and US. So, for my wife India and US. For me, India, Singapore and US. That process was fine for India like we had to write to Chicago to the Indian embassy and we got it in a day.  For Singapore I had to send my fingerprints to Singapore for verification. For US it was a lengthy process... not a lengthy process but it was time consuming …took me three months to get my FBI check from US. So, from Singapore and India, it was quicker but from US it took a lot of time because that's how their process is. So they take you fingerprints and then they give a report saying all clear or something. "
Sh,"	For for the US as well, you need to show the money. So, yes my dad helped out with that. So you need to show a bank statement that you have tuition amount for one year for the first year. So bank statement and loan amount like loan statement that you will be getting a loan. That’s what becomes your….His bank statement and loan - they are the I'd like to two separate things. So you need to show cash as well. So we had to show a letter saying that he's he would be like, financing my studies. And then he showed his bank statement as well his salary slips as well – everything. Marriage is important…So much in migration, like they were supportive. But like, when I even came to US, I told my dad I'm going to US and quitting my job in Singapore was like, What is what are you gonna do there? I was like, study there. I told him that I got an admit for these universities and he was like okay how much?.. and I said..this much I can afford, and this much, you’ll have to help me out. So for making that decision, it was my decision, but they were supportive of it. Then tell me okay no you cant go or anything like that. Marriage did play a role. Like staying in the US, I was on work visa. My wife was in a different city. I was in a different city. She was studying in a different city which was like, six hours drive. And then she was working in a different city as well and that was a 4 our drive. So I would go on Friday and come back on Monday. So, it did, it became a task. Now were both in Toronto…we both live in the same city, we both work here. It was because of jobs and stuff. Like the city where I was, she wanted to study architecture. There was not many good universities around that area. So, we had to find her a university that was slightly far. And then for work as well. You need to work in an architecture firm which would sponsor your work visa. So they will not many forms in my city who are willing to sponsor the visa. So whatever job she got in a different city, she had to take it because they would have sponsored her work visa. I was working in Indiana. She studied in Kansas and she was working in Missouri. But they are like adjoining states but still different states. And my parents were supportive of that, her parents were supportive of that so that’s where the family came in. "
Sh,"	Yes, for example like for this Canada thing, I told Canada visa forums, but then I had few colleagues in my company who are helping me out as well. And then when I told my employer that I got a Canada PR, so they, they were supportive. They like they made me travel from Toronto to Indiana. They paid for the flight, they paid for the accommodation, they paid like $60 for food as well per day. Just so that I can stay in Toronto, and my wife can. So my employer was supportive as well. So it was Deloitte Consulting. But the salaries are not as high as US. So the salary they were offering me here in Toronto was… so it was same as in US numbers. But again, you have that Canada to US conversion, right. So I wasn't very keen about it, so I moved, I joined another company called Accenture consulting. And my company partner who I was working for. He was like you can like travel from Toronto indefinitely. You can keep on working in US and keep on staying in US till whenever you want. But I was like, No, I need to find our local job coz it’s a commute right? Like Monday I need to go to Pearson airport, and then do my immigration because I have a work with US. So every I have an immigration and every Thursday I have an immigration to come back. So like at the airport, I need to get my passport stamped every week. That’s a lot of stamps. And US they ask “Why do you want to go” and all but because they have all your trips recorded. So after a while they are fine. Like they don't ask you anything… they know. I mean, I would know the visa officer as well. They would just stamp it but then still a hassle to go, need to stand in a line to get your passport stamped and everything. "
Sh,"	They're happy actually. So my parents came to US once. They came to Canada just now like few months back. They were helping us out with the kid and all, and they really liked it. They like it in Canada just because of the community. So I currently live in Milton. That's like, yeah, it's like too far from here. But initially when I came here for one year, I was living at Humboldt Park. So that's like very close to downtown. So that's when me and my wife are working here and now she's on mat leave. We needed to buy a house. Toronto is too expensive. So we need to move into the suburbs. The baby is 3 months old. "
Sh,"	Yes, I am very on top of immigration policies basically with what's happening in the US. I have a lot of friends there who seek my advice on there will be if they want to move to Canada, they seek my advice. And I'm also helping my sister for getting her PR in Canada and my brother as well who is on US work visa. So I'm like, on top of things what's happening in US and Canada. I think the US is biased. So there's a bill that is in senate right now, which is gonna remove the country wide quota for the green cards. If that happens, then an Indian person would get the green card in the same time as someone from any other nationality. But then the catch there is like people from suppose Pakistan – right now, they get green card in 2 years, but after that, if that bill is passed, they will get it in seven years or eight years. It standardizes time so it's bad for them but good for Indian, Chinese and Filipinos. Again, like in US the visa is based on lottery. It should be based on your profile. Like in Canada, they give points to your profile based on your work experience, your education, your age, and all that but in US it is still lottery. I think they were saying that theyre gonna make the green card based on your skills and your profile. But no, right now it is not. It's more of family based. So, if you have your brother is there, you can sponsor your dad for green card. Not like in Canada… like Canada you have like a proper express entry and a proper points-based system. Im in favor of the point the system because it gives an equal opportunity to everyone. Not just because you have your relatives here, you're getting a residency. Someone like me, who didn't have anyone here but still I got it so easily. It was because of this express entry point system. No [other countries considered].. It's just because I was aware of the American lifestyle, North American lifestyle. If I had to go in Australia, I had to start it from zero again, understand how jobs, things work, everything I have to start from scratch. But for moving to Canada it was just like putting my stuff in my car and then crossing the border. I drove. So it was like pretty easy compared to if I had to move to Europe or... Like I have my cousins who studied in France and are living in different cities in Europe. I think life in Canada is easier than what we are facing there because it's English here…language thing… like France and all you need to learn French and then it's difficult to learn at this age. With Canada also, I didn’t consider any other city because this is where you have most jobs. So right now, Im working with financial clients and a lot of times they have their offices in Toronto. "
Sh,"	Not in forums. But I like, theres a lot of colleagues back in the US who Im helping with their PR stuff. I have friends in India who I'm helping, but not on forums, its like a lot of personal advice rather than giving consultancy. I mean, they already made the call that they want to come to Canada and just helping them out in the process and all and then telling them the pros and cons of coming here because there are a lot of cons as well. Like if you don't get a job, then it's a really expensive to stay. Youll be out of your money like pretty soon. So the job thing is amazing, I mean, once you get a decent paying job, its great. I mean, it took me like two weeks because I had a North American degree and its IT consulting right? For my wife as well actually. She gave an interview when we moved to Toronto and then she got her job. Just if she would have been coming from India, like my sister will be coming from India, it will be a lot tougher. Because you're already in North America. I think that helps. "
Sh,"	I go there every year. Like my wife, she'll be going there in November and stay there for like, three, three months. So yeah, we make a point that we go there every year, sometimes twice in a year as well. "
Sh,"	I think starting with Singapore, I was out from India for the first time but it's a totally different culture in Singapore. So, getting used to that culture was a culture shock. Like there is a big Indian community there and Singapore is also very nice, very safe and all. There’s like 3 national languages Mandarin, Malay and Tamil. But then, I can say Tamil people are the most racist… racist people I have come across. Like there are a lot of, like, Sri Lankan and Indian Tamils - even my colleagues there who were from there, they would be like, “why are you here”? So that was like issue. South India and North India – theyre like different. Like our common language is English. So that's the thing so that was one thing that I found in Singapore that was bit of a culture shock, or culture gap. Although everything was English so that was helpful but yeah first time out from my country away from my family. It took me some while to settle. I had to ask, like, two people in the train that… will you want to take an apartment with me because it was so expensive that I cannot take an apartment myself. Yeah, so that was for Singapore. Food - getting used to the food there. Now they have a lot of different kind of food but back then….this was in 2010-2012 (2012-2018 was US)… I think the visa issues in US, like I wanted to change my company but I was sticking with them because I didn’t want to get my H1B visa cancelled. It’s a hassle right because it takes four months, five months. Even if the other company takes us till they need to wait five months, and then they will never know whether your visa will be… your transfer will be approved or not. I wanted to move out of Deloitte, but I had to stick with them. Because I was scared of doing the visa process, just a process. It's like so cumbersome."
Sh,"	I mean we can add more stuff to it but it looks good. I mean, I feel good recalling everything. Definitely like I was I'm along the way. And my family's proud of that as well like my dad. He lived in a town in India. And then for his work he moved to Delhi. That's like a bigger city. I grew up in Delhi, but then I moved abroad. So that's like a progress for us. But then when I go back to India, I stay in my hometown so yeah. I feel proud."
Sa,"	Yeah, well, I actually was just looking up, I was just googling places to live, you know. That's basically you know, and I hoped that I was going to move to Europe because you know I'm moving on my own so I was like oh, it'd be easier to travel back home and my sister lives in Berlin so she was there in case im tired of being alone. So I looked up places in France mainly and like other places but just nothing kind of really stuck out and then I know it's something that like in the week that I was deciding – I think about three things happened and Montreal came into my head…I think airlink had a direct flight which they promoted online and then, like things just kept popping up it like… it was the only place was kind of like calling me so I was like, its a bit further away and its a bit more expensive to be set but it just kind of was the only one calling out and that’s why I chose it. And like as well because I knew when people have gone Canada before and like although you have to go through the visa process. I mean, once you're there it kind of seems straightforward enough, whereas I know that France is known for its bureaucracy, and like filling out forms and making shit hard for you. So I was kind of like know that kind of put me off as well as a few friends that that had been there on Erasmus, and they were like, I don't know. So yeah, and cheap rent. That was a big thing coming from Dublin because I got so annoyed overpaying for stuff that wasn't good. And now I pay less. I paid for 700 euro for room in Dublin and now I pay less for an entire apartment to myself with bills included so it's Yeah, it's a lot better here…you get a lot more for your money here."
Sa,"	So Canada so basically so I ruled out Vancouver originally because just I was like look, it's a bit too far away to the side. And because I've been there for I mean, I thought it was gorgeous like, I mean, I like I like if somebody told me to move there, like I would agree, its happening. So because I when I went to visit my friends over there, I was like, this is gorgeous. I can see why people wanna live here, its lovely. But it kind of was also felt like that was their thing they did it so I kind of wanted my own thing and then it was kind of between Montreal and Toronto. But like I said. Toronto seemed nice but it just… it just seemed like a kind of random city to me…there was nothing really pulling me towards it whereas Montreal, the culture of it just it seems I really wanted to try it and I always was like, Look, If I get tired, if it gets too hard with the French in Montreal, I can always move to Toronto. It's not that far like, I flew in from Toronto and I've been connected on flights from there anyway. So yeah, it's the same distance. So I mean, I still have it at the back of my head, I could always go but I don't know. I think I really like it here so. "
Sa,"	Ireland, in Galway. Not the city. It’s a town. Its like 40 minutes away from the city. So the West but it's more Midlands. It’s the home of Supermacs, which I don't know if you've heard of. It's just a fast food place in Ireland. And it's it's known for…it's a kind of a culty thing.. do you use the word culty? Yeah, it's culty thing. It’s like a big in Dublin for like different Kipper. Like they have like, you know, proper divides with salt and vinegar and stuff whereas supermarkets sell it but they don’t have that kind of stuff…I think they there was some talk of it and bringing one to Australia a few years ago because of so many Irish living in Australia. But I think that fell through but there are actually I actually don't know if there are if it's gone international. But here's so many in Ireland. There's four in our town. Yeah it’s a big thing. Anyway, that's your claim to fame."
Sa,"	Yes. So when I left college, I had absolutely zero idea what to do. So I was working in a cafe I think, just before I finished my degree, so I stayed there for another six months, I think and then I moved to cork and my goal was to get work with like newspapers get some sort of a journalism writing job. So when I moved there Initially, I just wanted to get any sort of job and right away. So I worked in a cafe for a while and I was like, okay, it's fine. I'll do this for a few months and then I'll get my proper job. And then I ended up loving working there. And people there were so nice, it was like a little family so and after a few months of working there, I was made assistant manager. And then I was like, Oh my god, I actually really like this. Maybe I'll open a cafe myself, you know what I mean? I was kind of toying with that idea. And I stayed there for two and a half years, I think. And at the time, I had gotten a freelance job with The Echo paper in Cork. So I was like, writing the odd article for them. And then I also got a recurring job with Roscommon paper closer to back home. And when I got a weekly article, go with him, so I kind of was doing that on the side. So I kind of felt like I was nurturing and whatever writing I wanted to get done. And then towards the end of it, I was moving out of Cork and I was like, Look, I want to get My big girl job now [laughs], so am I said I flew home for a while to try and figure it out. So year. Summer of 2016. Yeah, I moved home for the summer while I was looking for jobs. And then yeah, I got this one in Dublin so it was a sort of editor job for Sci-fi website. So it wasn't so much writing. It was like, just when I read the job spec, I was like, Oh, I can do this. It was literally just like, obviously, correcting grammar and doing mistakes. And I was like, Yeah, no, I'm perfect for this. I literally used to correct everyone's essay in college and like I used to do that for my brother and sister and like, I'm, you know, like, people who are like… known. Like, you got this wrong and like, You spelled this wrong, you know, so people are like, yeah, that's my job. So I did that for three years. And I loved it. It was so good. And I learned loads because I had not actually got any clue on this sci tech stuff. So I kind of thought it'd be a struggle. But then if I could look it up, like the lingo and whatever… And it was good because it was the kind of website that was trying to be accessible to the everyday person. So, it wasn't wired. It wasn't like reading each audience was kind of like, you know, so it was kind of actually good to have me there. Because, you know, they might say something and I'm like, Well, I don't really know what that is. So if I don't know what it is somebody else wont. So yeah, I was kind of trying to make the language more accessible. So that was kind of so you know, and then I didn't know I was between leaving that job and finding something else in Dublin, you know, something along the similar thing. But then I just, I felt like I needed something a bit, a bit more. So, I said, I'd moved here and the aim was to kind of stay in the same field, but I was kind of like, I don't care. So I kind of saw it as a career break. And I'm not here to, you know, it's kind of here for the experience rather than, you know, so I knew as well I'd be narrowing down my options. I don't speak French. So, I was kind of like, nope, I'll go and I figure it out. If its a job in my industry, Great. I just was kind of like Ill do whatever there's to gain experience…but luckily I got something similar now I guess write a bit more so it's been more I guess… so its copywriting so to describe toys for kids, and so like there’s a bit of editing and like doing newsletters and stuff like that. So yeah, it's I think it's perfect because it's similar enough to you know, that kind of an industry but also a bit more… like describing toys for kids..more accurately for the parents because theyre the ones who are going to be buying and but we're launching an app now for kids to play with so like even think of all the everything that goes on behind the scenes, like you know, you need to write the Appstore descriptions, you need to write game instructions, all this kind of stuff that needs to… it is for like three year olds, but also it's kind of like trying to align the language. So I mean, you want to make it fun and accessible, but then again you're not advertising to kids, you’re advertising to their parents. So, it’s kind of trying to pick the right language."
Sa,"	No, it was Art. So it was it was it was weird course. It was an Arts course with a specialism in human rights. So that was what I was very interested in the start. And the first year you do four subjects, I'm in the second year you drop to three and all the time your specialism is it's meant to be the four and they encourage you to do a placement. And so, I went to London for three months. And then I went to Geneva three months. And the goal was to find some, like I was working in NGOs and just being an intern and yeah, trying to work in like kind of fields you might be interested in. And then I went for one in Geneva because they needed a French speaker and you had to keep up with your French because that was my other subject… and then my final two, they we're in English and French and with the specialism of human rights, but you don't get final grade with your specialisms and so it's a bit weird that it's on the degree title and then you don't really, its not like you're qualified for anything. So and the thing that I love the most in the course was English and I knew when I finished then I was like I probably should’ve taken a year out after my exams and I probably should have done a straight Journalism course…probably would have liked it more, but you don't know that when you’re 18 or whatever. Yeah, so after that, English was my, what I was best at so yeah.. I wanted to then pursue a journalism career…"
Sa,"	So I think I had decided by Christmas 2018 that I was definitely going to come. I think, probably this time of year, I was kind of formulating ideas and playing with the idea of Montreal. And so I kind of decided at Christmas and then from January then I kind of started the whole visa process? So it took about January to April, I think just getting all the documents sorted, waiting, like it takes a few weeks each time and all that stuff. And then I got it in April. Yes. And then from April to August was just, like quit my old job and kind of plan the move, looking at flights, looking at jobs You know do everything I could do about it. Yeah. That was basically it. So this is pretty much about a year, like less than a year maybe. "
Sa,"	Not really, I think I was leaning towards this one, because I knew people who…don't know it's slightly different process to when they did.. but I knew most people had done this for Montreal. They all were like, it's grand. Its easy, like you apply, theres obviously like, you can get refused but I didn’t see any reason as to why that might be. I thought it was going to be straightforward enough. So no, I think there's only one that I was considering because I wanted to be open as well. It's an open work permit that I have. So I didn't want to like I didn't know if I could get directly like I mean, say like say the company I was working for in Dublin was international if I knew they had and office Montreal, it was perfect. That was great. I would have been wanting to sponsor me or whatever. But because I wanted it to be open I was like, that was it seemed like the best option. And I didn't. To be honest, I didn't look into too many other options for Europe. I think maybe because, I don't know, I think the Canadian website is done pretty well, like its pretty straight forward, I couldn't think straight forward because it's literally like, here's you, here's what you need, here's all your steps. Whereas I think with other places, it's kind of it's not like easily laid out for you. It's kind of like you need to go and find the information yourself. So I didn't really delve too much into it. This was the only one that I found pretty much everything on easily. And yeah it's interesting to me. My brothers in Australia too and he got into trouble because he wanted to apply for permanent residency at some point and then it just seemed pretty like convoluted and like… Whereas this… I mean, a friend of mine was applying as well at the same time, I don’t think theyre going to come in now but I think they just wanted to look at the option and they're like, Oh, can you understand this website. It is so confusing. I was like, literally, it’s the easiest one, not being like whatever, but I think it was like so well laid out, they kind of make it clear, and the time you need all these documents and you need all this. So it's kind of like.."
Sa,"	I hate them that’s why I left [laughs] No and so no, I'm really close to my family. That was actually a big point, I was like, aah this is going to be tough. The fact that I suppose my brother and sister living abroad – like it wasn't the biggest deal so I was like, oh, like my parents are used to it. I mean, I kind of felt bad leaving initially coz its like Im the kid that’s going now but my brother had just moved from Australia and now ..it was kind of weird timing because the day my flight left was the day he moved into Dublin so I was a bit disappointed with that because I was like, I would have liked to have been in Dublin for a while when you were there. But I kind of was also felt like a cross over, I was like right you can look after the parents now. I think it would have felt bad leaving if all 3 of their kids were not home. But hes home now. Hes living in Dublin. So, and then my sister Yeah, she comes home often. She lives in Berlin and its not that far. And I think she's planning on staying up there another few years. So so it's kind of like, Oh, yeah, like, I could do this. Now they had obviously gone over with boyfriends or girlfriends, so and I hadn't. But I was like, Look, I mean, I think I want to do something for myself, and I want to do whatever. So. I don't know. Like, I mean, it was. I don't know. Yeah. Well, my parents, I think, like, Yeah, like that’s tough coz I used to go home like every two years or so. So yeah, if anything, they were a possible deterrent to me leaving. But. It's fine, to be honest. And that was a big thing in terms of choosing Montreal. So I was like that, you know, when when people are like, oh, we're immigrating. We're going to Canada or Australia. So theyre like, they have their big Irish group and everything there and then you don't see them for years, and it's a big thing. And I was like, Look, I don't want that. I want to go somewhere that's not that far of a flight, that I am gonna come home often and I do want people to visit me often. So I don't want to do this big “Oh my God I’m never gonna see you again”. I wanna come home for Christmas and have to come home in March again coz a friend of mines getting married. I want them to come out this summer. So it's kind of like I never want it to more than like two or three months without seeing someone. So yeah, that's probably there's probably a big factor in where I chose. Yeah, yeah, they would have stopped me from going like to like super remote, something like Australia. And then just as well, so my brother has been there and when he came home I hadn't seen him for like, 2 years. And I was like, this is very long, like, you know, and because it was so far away, so expensive to go, it really was a deterrent. like, you'd be talking at least two grands for fights. And then like, with here, it depends on when you go… I think my Christmas flight home is going to be expensive but well in general its like $500 return. So I mean, which is quite good. I mean, obviously, you still cant go over board, because it's still an expensive life. But I mean, if you can get there to get directly in like six and a half hours or something, its not that bad. I mean there are places in Europe which are like the same. So its kind of like, so yeah, they’re are a big factor in what way right. And they probably the reason why I probably would have wanted to go to Europe, you know, It would have been easy to come home, but this worked out.. "
Sa,"	Well, professionally, it's definitely just anything to do with the writing sphere. Like, I definitely got good experience in my old job. So I think that becomes really like future jobs, like editing like any article. I even was kind of thinking like, maybe I'll get into the book publishing or something along the lines. Yeah, I'm good at basically taking a big pile of crap and trying to turn it into something concise and readable, and it's making it clear. So I think I'm good at that. And then writing. I done know, I started off again now and I mean, when I did articles and stuff before, they were all really like opinion pieces that like my own mind, whatever I thought, and I think now that I'm writing, although its fun, I don't think its like my strongest skill I think. Im good at it but it definitely can be better. I don't think I'm as good at imagination. I think I'm good at writing down what I know, and what I believe. And, and you know, there's that little push. I don't know if I'm definitely the person that will be writing books and all that kind of Yeah. But yeah, they’re my main like, jobs. I don't know what I have in life skills. I think I'm quite independent. Yeah, I mean, obviously, I'm here on my own. So, I'm kind of quite optimistic. I think so kind of, like, if I kind of was like, I knew what might hard to be on my own. And I was, like, comforting to know that it will be that like, the worst that will happen is that I can always go back home. I know, it's gonna it's fine. Like to me, I'm, like, you know, ive been on my own in the past as well. So I think this is a personality thing. So yeah. Yeah, I think, I think probably, it's not like, like if I wasn’t enjoying it, I think I'd be very proactive and Be like okay, well Oh my god, this is awful. I'm just gonna go home, you know what I mean? So like initially coming year, had a bit of, like I was worried about like health things and getting set up with health insurance and stuff like that so I didn't have a scare and I'm kind of like, Oh no, maybe I should just go home, but I'm like no things will get good, its fine. last week got a mouse in my apartment I was like, Well, I'm gonna leave the apartment, Im just gonna go rather than trying to deal with that thing. Yeah, so luckily my landlord is very good at he came around to me tand he sorted it out for me. But I think like I went to go stay in a hotel and I was like, literally like, I cant. I had a bad week last week. I think I was just like, because it was the first time I actually felt truly alone here. I was like okay, there's my stairs.. where I'm going to go when I was like There's no one like I can see…I don't know anyone I can stay with or anything. You know, so when I left the apartment, I need to go to the hotel so it's kind of lonely and a bit like oh now and then I'm kind of thinking of like ‘Oh What am I doing here?’ Maybe I shouldnt be here, you know, the spiral. So, you know, you have that then I was kind of like, No, no, we'll be fine in a few days, we'll get rid of it. You know, trying to, I think go to trying to be like, fine, you feel shit for a while and then get up and move on with it. So, I mean enough to say that if I hate… if I continue to, like, have bad swings here that I’ll leave, like, I'm not gonna worry about like, what people think you know, whatever. But for now I think yeah, this is what I want. I think Yeah, as well as that I think because it was in my house and then it was like, you know, when you come over on your own like, literally have like one base where you call home then you don't you don't have friends ,you don't have your family or whatever. So that's the one place where I could go and then I was like theres a mouse here. I was like, I can't stay here and I’m not comfortable here and then it was like if I’m not comfortable here then I'm not comfortable anywhere in this country so then it was kind of like probably a bit of an overreaction. It was just a mouse. It was fine. But you know it's little things like that they've kind of made me feel.. I hope that it was just one like when my landlord came out and checked, he checked everything like holes and like droppings anywhere. There was nothing. So he's like, I'm fairly sure it's just one mouse and it got caught in the trap and it was the worst night of my life because I had to hear it dying. But it's gone now and I think I haven't noticed that the last few nights. So fingers crossed. Fingers crossed. "
Sa,"	So, I'm just gonna say roughly, and I'm going to maybe do a timeline. Yeah. So December is when I started looking at so… like, the first thing I have is just the websites, yes, just going on to like, government, Canada website. So okay, research on that. And then there was a list of documents you needed. So that involves checks say when you go to a doctor, and that was like going to the guards [police] to get approval of stuff. And that's stuff, like CVs, references. Like just basic info look I don't think it was something that nothing was like I'm… probably getting the Garda cert was the hardest because when they send it and they were like two weeks to get this back to us and whatever so that was pretty… of fingerprints as well. Biometrics yeah and then that was everything that I kind of give to them and then just go with it. There was no other real intermediary or like I didn't have to do with any lawyers or any other people. I was basically just doing my own thing, just going through the website. That’s everything they needed before I came. I'm going to say August then. When I came I had to go through customs and then copies of it all the documents that I needed initially of  money in my account, all right, okay and bank details and money so basically they either needed to have certification that you’re going to leave the country like a flight booked back home or your money to prove this you could stay there. They needed, I think it was 1500 dollars for this 1500 – 2000 Canadian dollars. Just make sure that you could pay for somewhere to stay for a while. And then for your flight back home so okay and they needed like full copies of all my IDs like everything like my passport and like all this I am who I am. I think that was everything then then they checked it over and then they gave me a SIN number. I thought that I had to go to like a place for it, like a separate office but they have a place right beside customs that if you want to pay something extra, like they'll process there. That’s what youre going to need to get your work permit. So they gave me the sin number and they gave me the work permit all there. And yes then when I was leaving the airport, I had everything ready that I needed to set up like for a job and the health cards is a big different, in that, you can only get it if you have an established employer, there was some other things in that I didn't have either. So I wasnt eligible for it. But I am eligible for health insurance at work after three months, so I have to sort that in January. I think that’s it. So the health insurance I have is a basic package it's like done, they do it for your visa. Its like a package for travel for like advice and stuff and then for basically health emergency so like if I die or if I have an accident. It doesn't cover like general medical and all that. You have to have a Canadian healthcare or you can pay private for it. So when I came here, I did have to go to a private health clinic. So I had to pay all those fees because I didn't have a health card and because I didn't have health insurance yet at work. So you have to pay all those fees yourself. It was my own like check-up. It was something that I want to get done even before I came over and I didn't have time. So, like doing over here it cost me more money. Yeah, you do have to go to a private clinic. Like that took a while actually trying to figure that. I tried like three numbers being like look Im not from here, like, where do I go? And then I was being directed to somewhere else. But the bottom line is it has to be private, you have to pay up. I think you can try and get like advisor has insurance, but like I think as long as I did, but it's not urgent. It's kind of like that's on you. That's the main thing."
Sa,"	Um, yeah, like that was the aim. I knew was going to be my so there was like no other opportunity for me to live on my own. Because I couldnt afford to do that in Ireland and we don't even have studios either. Like you might find them if you did a search, like one or two vacant ones. But its not really there…everyone just shares big houses whereas here it was, it was almost the norm to find one bedroom apartments. So I was like and it was a lot cheaper. So even though it's dear by Montreal standards, for me like it's quite cheap so I think it was the only opportunity that I was going to have so I was like I gotta try it. So that's why I did it. I mean, I could have gotten a room for like $200 anywhere and save some money but I kind of wanted my space, and figure out everything so yeah, it could be a lot cheaper to share. "
Sa,"	So it was all to do with technology, and then moving here, it was finding the apartments online. And yeah, like “moving to Canada” Im just gonna write that website. Yeah, because that was such a great website it gave me all the resources. It was set up by an Irish man and he…. it's just so comprehensive it gives you everything like up when I signed up, they messaged me every two months. They were like, you said, you're moving on the 19th. By this stage you should have this sorted and you know. On the day that I moved, they’re like, congratulations you're on the move. And then they're like, here's a video of seven things you need to do when you get to Canada. So its like first do this and second do this. It was so great. So it's like such a good resource. So like, technology just like trying for like, coming here. And then when I came here and we should be right Montreal blog because it's like a, loads of Instagram accounts that follow it and just to like for tourism, see what was good here and. Oh Facebook groups. Like, you know yourself. And then, what else, searching for the job. Oh, LinkedIn. I got my job through LinkedIn. I've been searching on like Craigslist.. like in Ireland it’s a bit dodgy but here everyone posts jobs on Craigslist and there was like, like babysitting jobs, It was a secret shopper jobs, It was like, massage therapist, but like, yeah, you know, so it was a bit dodgy so I didn't find it that great so I went on linked in. So I got like, three or four calls from places after that. So I would recommend for job search. Like, I mean, I used Linkedin quite a bit in my last job and I was like Why don’t I use Linkedin more. Cant tell, it was like, Facebook in the way that Facebook used to be big and now Linkedin is for work, do you know what I mean? I mean I know it's all about the jobs and like whatever that's what it advertises, but it does actually work."
Sa,"	no no no I was applying. There was a couple people I did reach out to but I didn't hear from them and I kind of know that like cold emailing and calling doesn't always work unless they're actively looking for someone like you. No, I applied to all the jobs and like a lot of them are easy applies as well, you can just click and apply to a lot of them. It's better than sending in a cover letter. Yeah, LinkedIn is great for that. And then at the job I'm in now and all of the toys and stuff are sold and targeted towards Amazon. So a lot of the works involves SEO keyword research. So that's a huge part of technology that I use every day. Oh yeah, Whasapp is key. I don’t use skype because we just use whatsapp now. So that's how I message everyone every day called everyone all the time. That's the my main source of communication for and then, like other social media say like for like us the likes of Instagram and yeah, you know, you know, so I'm gonna be the main source of communication issues. I mean, obviously, I’ve got inyternet set up at the house and everyone needs internet anymore. I got a good data plan joints with the phone. So that was good, because when I did have an internet issue, like I didn’t have internet for 2 weeks in the house. I was using up all the data on the phone and obviously going out and around, so its very important for like Google maps and all."
Sa,"	Like three weeks so very lucky. Yeah. So basically, because I got the apartment so so… basically I came over on the 19th and I had the Airbnb for two weeks. So it's like I give myself the whole two weeks to just find the apartments. Obviously it might take longer or I'm not going to think about jobs, because my parents were like, “you don’t have a job yet, you sure you want to go over” and I was like no Im going to find the apartment first, that's key, and then look for a job. So because I found it so early, like I got here on the Monday and found the apartment by the Wednesday, like I got to spend all the rest of the time looking for the job. So cant remember the day and I actually got it but, I was assured that I had it so then I started on the 24th of September. It was an open work permit. So basically, I can work like the HR guys were like, okay, because you're from Ireland, I need to see your visa, I need to see your SIN number I need to see proof of my bank details but I think that was just to pay me. I don't think they need it. So once you get the permit and once its open, I mean, some of them. Obviously, if you came over with another company, and they were like it was a specified or if you're coming over to study, I don't think you can work anywhere. Like you don't mean you have to be a whole separate thing but because mine is very open, I can work for the whole 2 years. So I don't think I can stay here any longer than that. I mean, I think there is the possibility to apply for more time, but I think they brought in something new recently, that you might be able to extend your visa maybe in a year or two but in general unless you find like a specified job and they weren't willing to vouch for you and want you to stay longer..I was just two years ago I think it's fairly recent two years to do whatever you want and then after that leave..Yes, yes, it is. It was a pool. So like when you when you join first they were like applied to join some pool and then they're like welcome, youre in the pool. Now you have to apply to actually do something that's and then you do it and then they’re like, congratulations you did this. Now gives us this document… so was kind of like a little process like that, but it didn't really feel like full steps because I think the way they used to do it before, it was like a lottery and it took a lot of time and I remember my friend doing this, they were so stressed that … it would be like it could be sometime in March or April that we're just going to send you a message and then you can get on the internet and Its first come first serve. And it was like, I remember they were so stressed about it and then they got their thing whereas now I don't know whether the pools wider or its that they don’t have many? I don't think it's as likel at the time…so they're like between now and now… they'll let you know when the pools are open but I don't think it's like ….I think they gather all the first and then they select you from it. So it's not like the first person that gets in will get it. It's kinda like they do choose your from a list but I've never really felt that I was narrowed down or whatever. I think the likelihood of not getting chosen for it would you have to have something that would deter them like say like if your passport was invalid or if like updating the criminal records you cant come gere or like maybe if you've been here before and you're trying to apply again. So it didn’t really feel like it was…no maybe it was… maybe they chose me from list of people but like it didn't really feel like it was hugely selected because it was done so quickly. So It was like, within a day or two it was like here you’re approved for this, not move on to the next stage.. it was like this. "
Sa,"	Yeah, no, that was the only thing that I had sorted  because everything else, like I cant find a job unless I would go in an interview, I can't find an apartment without going and seeing it, I cant set up a bank account until I go into the bank so Airbnb wass the only thing I can do from abroad where I like filter that down through super hosts and…I want to make sure that you know, the people Im staying with are good like that. So it's about like okay, maybe don't stay like, alone with a man, in a weird part of town you know, you know. So that was the only thing I had coming over. But it was really good to have someone coming over knowing that I had somewhere to be. At least it was like I'm going somewhere these people are expecting me to come here so it was kind of helpful."
Sa,"	So I knew the directions from the metro. I knew that the place of staying was near a Metro. I was like that’s hand. But I did factor in the fact that I had a massive bag and two other bags with me, and I was just a tourist hanging. And so I had a few homeless people, like, like a few rough looking people come up and kind of chat with me, so then I was like, I'm just gonna take an uber for the rest of the trip. So I would recommend that, like you get to the airport and its straight into town, but I was like, yeah, ubers are much cheaper here so you just get an uber where you're going. Yeah they were great [uber and Airbnb] because it was so much cheaper like 250, for two weeks, two weeks, which is very good. I mean, like, I stayed at a really bad hotel that night when I saw the mouse. And that was like $60 $70 and if you do pay for two weeks of that, that's a lot more expensive but also it was horrible. So I'm like, it was like a one star hotel where it's like, at least at Airbnb, you have insider knowledge, people tell you stuff. Like they told me like, they set up my internet for me, they were really helpful. definitely would recommend that. Can I write this down like a travel section? And so I'm just going to come in here and then it was so Airbnb first. I Had a girl that lived here before. So she was… she went to college with me. She did same courses with me and then then moved here for two years. I remember seeing her pictures in Montreal so she sent me a document of that she sent to the guy who was taking over her job, but it was all like, what you need to know about living in Montreal. So she told me to look at the plateau which was great because I actually messaged her when I came here the first week. I only had 2 house viewings and I didn’t go to the first one because she told me not to because she was like, look, like you can go see it. She was like look its not the best street. Even the place that you live in is nice, your walk home isn’t going to be great. She was like a if youre living on your own, I just wouldnt recommend it. So I ended up just cancelling that and then I was like look I found somewhere else. So, I didn't go to that one. And then I got the viewing for the place that Im living now. And she was like, that is an amazing spot if you can get that in any way, take it. So, it was a huge help having her to be honest, to be honest. I mean, I could have ended up in first place and it could have been fine. But like, having someone who knows is so great. Like I'm from Ireland. I've been to Dublin. Like I know. I know things about living in Ireland. If you don't live in the city itself, if you don't know this exact area, if you don't do this street. I mean, you could take this is a great area, but this particular street isnt nice, you know, it's it's beneficial. Yeah. So having her like her insider knowledge was very valuable. I mean you could maybe find it online but then you would find like posts that were made in 2008. You know like, I don’t know if I could trust this stranger. But I knew this girl. I was like I knew, like, you know, to make sure we have similar ideas and stuff. So I was like, if she was advising it, you know, I, gonna trust her like, so it's Yeah, it was very helpful. I mean, like, you could, I suppose you need to know the area and its hard to like “ask where is good to live” coz everyone has their own opinion. So yeah, that was good. And what else? "
Sa,"	So okay, I'm gonna put her down. Yeah. So she was probably the first that I had any kind of, in Montreal. initially I think I messaged her like a year ago I was like thinking move here I'm thinking of moving said lot of places. Would you recommend anything? And she was like yeah move here. So Im gonna say friend from college and then I don't knowlike, now that Ive come here, I mean haven't had a huge… yeah like it was mainly just I talked to like other people that have lived in Canada so like other people… so yeah friend of mine from work she lived in Vancouver so and they were like this little group you have like this like people living outside of Ireland. So yeah,  And I can write the Facebook group here and then that website as well. The move to Canada one, they have forums and stuff if you wanna post any questions or whatever. And here I’ll write down bumble and meetups but haven't fully used them yet but I'm just gonna write in the future because when it starts to snow, and I get more alone… yeah"
Sa,"	I haven’t done that yet because I think when even like the odd questions you pop up in the likes of forum thing I'm like, I haven't done that yet. So, I can't advice but I probabl;y should. I mean, I did a Google review the other day and I never use google reviews and I remember talking to my brother about it and he's big for TripAdvisor. He uses it for everything like here. He came see me in Dublin for like a lunch. And he was like, Oh, I think this place is number one on TripAdvisor. I was like, all right. Like I live here, I know theres a few places that are good. But he was like, but this is on Tripadvisor so hes very like, he's very trusting of it. And then was like, all right, well do you post on it and he was like no and then I was like you should. And then I realized that I should because I use a lot of like I would use the internet live like best place to go for this.. like best bagels in Montreal. I use it a lot. So I probably should. I put like one google review the other day for a restaurants because I went with my friends and it was so cheap, and so nice. And staff are amazing. Like, you know, like I'd be really compelled to do it if I had a really good experience. if I had a bad one.I know I probably should left a bad one for that hotel that night. I was just worried that like the guys would know that it was me. Coz Id just left that day but it was aweful. But then I went on to booking.com and like all the reviews were pretty bad anyway, so so I was like I didn't stay here because it was it was good reviews. I stayed here because it was the cheapest and closest space in my house. Okay. But anyway, um, No, I haven't given any advice, but I If I saw someone like obviously asking questions or like if they were like, Oh, I don't know about this. I mean, somebody told me theyre coming to montreal from Ireland, I would definitely sit down with them for three hours. And I think I'm still learning. Its all new for me. And I'm kind of like, I don't know, like why you asking me it's like, when people come up from the street? And they're like, asking for directions are and so I'm like, I'm trying to even come up with the words to respond to them in French, let alone tell you. Where I don't know where I am. I don't know why people approach me because I clearly look lost. I'm looking at Google Maps and someone's like, do you know where this is? "
Sa,"	It has made like, I kind of like it, that I kind of like that theres a different language, and I don't know why. I find it I like the challenge if I like, I don't know, like when I came here first it was a bit of a shock that it was so widespread. And that's funny because Montreal people will tell you yet that the plateau and all these others  places there's so much English speaking there is so much English like 70% English and 30% French. I don't think that I think everyone speaks French so I think it's a bit of a shock when I get here first that, every when you hear in the background is speaking French and there was something nice about it though because it sounds like I'm here somewhere different, different culture, theres something new because like like I mean I can look at a sign and figure it out and like if you gave me a menu I can figure out most of things on it. It's like, it's nice to kind of feel like your brain has been trained to get into like work through stuff. Now I find it really hard to hold a conversation because even if I figure out exactly my word for oatmilk, I remember to request it, and then they ask me something in response and Im like… I don’t know. It is difficult, but when you learn a few words, and then you kind of make some effort to communicate someone it actually makes really good. So yeah, I actually like having it. And I would recommend those people like that they'd have had it in school. Say my friend that came she was at school with me. So she remembered few words and she was able to, like, do a few bits herself. I mean, if it was in German or in some other language like, I don't know if, like I was in China, I’d be fucked. I mean, it does help that I have some familiarity, but it's definitely a shock. Initially, when you realize oh, no, everyone does not speak in English. Just to hear it in the background, its even wierd, like speaking English. Even when I started my job was like, Oh, I can speak English. Okay, you know what I mean? And speaking with the flow as opposed to ummm.. could I … like trying to figure out stuff. "
Sa,"	No. Okay news anything like that? No The only like, humanitarian like NGO like I mean I tried to like set up a volunteering when I came here first but that was for myself to volunteer. I tried to then they were like we will get back to you and yeah, and then because it was before I got the job, so I was kind of like, how can I lose time but then I was like, I don't know if you can Yeah, so I don't know, maybe in time ago nice now that I'm so good and no, I didn't I didn't use it. "
Sa,"	And so, the main thing I'll say is that I think we're beyond lucky in Ireland because our passports like qualifies us to go so many places and it's I think we don't realize how easy we have it. Like even someone who went to Canada and we'll talk about at work work, like they qualify to come to Canada but it would like so much harder for them to try and work abroad and like we really move so freely across Europe and like, like, everyone I know. It's like the worsening now I know with Brexit and how that's all changed. But like people in Ireland are always like Im moving to Australia or im mving to Berline, always moving somewhere and you're going to work and apply and you just have to set up your papers, whatever. Even to move to Canada bit extra to do but still fairly straightforward. So a girl from India who I worked with in Dublin. She had such a nightmare. She had to apply for a new visa every year. There was a rule where she… she left Ireland for like 1 day or 2 days in something in this calendar year and if she didn’t, theyd take away her visa. It was just awful. So I was kinda like, Yeah, I don't know they do realise that you work here. So I think it's made me more interested. So it's made me really I know, it's hard because generally, people get into  policy or policies that affect them. So basically, you know, you'll always see people like fighting for cancer research because they're mum died of cance and they are angry and rightfully so and they want something. So it's different when…. I think it’s a big privilege when you got everything handed to you that you're kind of like, this doesn't affect me or is like, I don't know, it's hard because I'm kind of like I said it was the same it feels wrong for it to be easier for one person and harder for another. It feels wrong that people get put in cages in America and deported because they just want to live there. I mean, that's, I mean, that's like a whole other issue, that’s like, asylum and that's like people that actually need to live there. Not just someone like me who’s like “I would like to go to Canada”. I mean, it's so, the privilege we have is completely ridiculous. But yeah, it has made me more, if not involved in it, definitely more like aware of how, like when you hear about people like struggling with little kids, you're like, oh, like I can't believe that you have to worry about that when I don't you know, and it really makes you realize that privilege. "
Sa,"	I think it really depends. I think it's really the place where we are so I'm literally in a warehouse in the middle of an industrial park. There's no… I think the closest hotel is like a 20 minute walk and there's no cafes nearby there's no shops nearby there. If you forget your lunch there is this like truck that goes by and I think that like, that’s your only option unless you have a car and you can drive to wherever. There's nowhere nearby. And like even when I was coming into the interview, I decided that I was gonna hate this place because I hate the look of industrial parks. You know like, when youre near and airport, you know what that looks like, its like urghh. So I think that's the main issue. We had like a team lunch the first week, you know, because I'm not the only new person who have which makes it a lot easier. And then they were kind of talking about doing like an Oktoberfest thing, and then maybe a drinking thing. And then before the Christmas party, so it feels like they will do social things. But I think it's more difficult to where we are. And they were kind of like, what we're going to go, you know, and then people were like, well, maybe we should just stay here in the office or drink here, because, you know, everyone is pulling from different areas. And they’re like its little warehouse, and if we drink here, you know, someone is going to get injured. And so it's kind of like, where do we go then? Because we need to get a Metro and a bus. It's mainly the location, I think. I mean, everyone there has been really nice, but I suppose it's the same as anywhere when you start somewhere new you're kind of like, I'm gonna be really nice and polite, but I don't know what your personality is. Yeah, I don't know if it's okay to do this, and alcohol just helps with that [laughs]. "
Sa,"	I think so. Okay, you know, you never know what might happen. But yeah, like I could end up staying and making more friends find someone here, you never know. But fow now. No, I think I've always seen it as like a short term thing. I'm just here for I just want to be here for a while… I want to challenge myself to live on my own. I want to challenge myself to go somewhere completely new and completely different. Find a job like all these things, Like Im done with some of the hardest parts now. And now its just like adjusting. Like I don't know if this part is going to be the hardest because it's always different when your mind’s occupied it has so much to worry about. Like, oh I need to find my apartment, now I need to find a job, and my friends visiting but once they go and you know it starts to snow it's going to be a bit more like, okay, now you have to like, not only be okay living here, but try and enjoy it as well. I think quite keep it short term, like a year or maybe even less than a year, then I'll probably make the best out of this place. I think it's if I keep the short term, I'm really trying to value it and I'm like no, enjoy yourself. I mean, you're not going to have this next year you're going to be home and Dublin or go away and you want to be like I wish I was on my own again. So I'm kind of like trying to be you know, trying to enjoy it as much as I can."
Sa,"	So before I moved to here, so I was in a long term relationship for about six years, and that ended badly. So that was I think summer 2018. I think initially, your initial thing is like, I gotta move out, I gotta do something. I gotta cut my hair. I gotta go.. And then I was like, No actually gonna keep going and like, cuz I wanted to eave my job in summer 2018. And I was going to move to go away with him. And that was the whole plan. So then I was like, Okay, this big thing just happened. I don't want to change something else big in my life. You know, you've got your base, who youre with and your job. So I was like I'm going to say my job for maybe another year, and then I'll do and then I'll figure out something else. So I think that was partly why you wanted to Do something different, but I will say, That's why I came here because I don't like because many people have asked me like, did you move because of the’bad breakup? And Im like Well, no, I didn't mean to get away from anyone.. I didn't move to, like escape or whatever, because it was like, I always want to travel. I knew when I started, that he didn't. And I knew that would be kind of part of my life that I wouldn’t ger to do enough. I was kind of content. I don't think I felt that I was missing out on anything at the time for, I think it was all like, I mean, he knew that too, like many people do, My parents used to say it. They were like, oh, D, S are abroad. But you know, we always thought to be Sarah, you know, everything. And I was like, Yeah, okay, whatever. So it was always something that I knew that I wanted, and then eventually when the opportunity presented itself was like, so yeah, so I think that's why I gave myself a bit of extra time to kind of, coz obviously a breakup is hard, it's almost like I don't want to do this as kind of a reactionary thing. And then by Christmas and I was like all right yeah, I'm feeling good, Still though, I’d like to be single for a little while. Obviously when I have the long term or the short term idea in my head like that I'm not going to be living here for years and years. I mean it may be if I was in Ireland it might be different for I mean, I'm not definitely not actively seeking a relationship nor would I I mean, again never say never. I mean my parents were like you could me meeting someone in Montreal and stay there for 10 years. But I'm not really romantic like that. I still think I need a lot more time. I had a great year but being in a bad thing like that is hard. When you kind of get out, initially you’re upset but now I'm like, I'm actually really enjoying everyon,  I really like, you know, I like the fact that I'm here. I've never been here. I've never gotten this opportunity. So, it's kind of like it's all for the greater good. Yes, it has made me be a bit more like no to that. So yeah, maybe in a year."
Si,"	When I think about countries outside like when I think about other countries than India, I'm into this technology space so I know what are the roles available in India for this particular technology. We are we don't have that much projects. Even if I join any any organization and work on onto this technology, I will be considered as a beginner beginner in the sense like I won't be getting profiles or I won't be I won't be getting directly to work on data. I'll be doing some documentation parts so I won't have an appropriate to work like as per my knowledge or As for my the technology, which is which is there in the industry right now. So countries like US, Canada and North America and US and all all these countries, they have advanced technologies, and they are already working in this space. So even though I'm learning big data so Canada, must be the technology space or the education space in Canada must have been ahead. It is talking about artificial intelligence and it's talking about emotional intelligence as of now. After big data there is artificial intelligence than there is now people are talking about emotional intelligence whereas in my country there is nothing no concept called as emotional intelligence. Till now, so, emotional intelligence is spoken by only a psychologist and people are related to medicine field, but not not this medicine plus technology is not it is not at all like, integrated as of now. So, I wanted to study abroad and I selected Canada"
Si,"	I found the process visa process for Canada easy. And, I selected Montreal as my friends have already done the course from this college so I had… I knew the feedback of this college I knew the feedback about the feedback in the sense…the living… and living conditions in Montreal. So it is always better if you have some people around in that same city and they're telling the guide you that these are the things you need to do in six months, one year, two years. So if I have a Guided approach. I was considering Toronto but there it was 2 years, 3 years of study and I’ve already done engineering. I've already done like 10 years of work experience into education industry only. So I have like lot ot… my profile also study and teach, study and work. And also I wanted to study much. So I just wanted one year of a specialization and then get into my space, like the technology space, how it works out and all that. I’ve seen Toronto but there was no 1 year course and as for my expense and budget, it was not that suitable for me. So, I selected Montreal. I gave a thought about studying in the same thing in 2019 Jan and I was about. So I just thought my friend friend told me that there is there are the admissions happening for June 2019 intake. So I just applied, I gave my prerequisites all the prerequisites… I gave my English test. So by March, March, and my academics, everything was done. I send the application and I got a letter of application by April end so I was supposed to come in June, but since I have been I was working and I do wind up that process. So I couldn't join in June. So I had to come here in the October intake. Like what Im thinking…. what is my mindset now… I've got an opportunity to learn and advance specialization. So I will be more keen into this technology related to data gathering and data handling. So, I'm going to just see what are the options that are available after studies after one year so at that time I will consider as well as per the requirement and all that what all countries I can travel to and work in from working based. So when I was doing your research about Montreal, and also there are many universities offering this. So, I might go into the Masters in the same space. "
Si,"	It started from jan jan 2019. So it took me around seven to eight months. Things went in place. The proper flow happened. The factor is, though, the course which I will be joining, I will pretty much knew that I wanted to do, whatever work experience I have, I want to go to the next level. So, for the next level, I need to be skilled. So if Montreal did not have the college or this course, I would have opted for another, like another city, also Toronto. So I would have taken a two year or three year course. But luckily I got the same course for one year over here. "
Si,"	Finances…umm… so since I am a working professional, whatever student finances are required, like paying the fees, and then does it go to deposit which is required for student to that was handled. And my fees is being handled by my family. So half of the fees will be sponsored by them, and half of the fees, I have paid it. So sponsoring is… is like a backup. So in case if I'm not able to get a part time job and all and I'm not able to manage my expenses then my family will come into play. I'm looking for part time work over here. Into the same skillset… like I have training experience so there are a lot of colleges over here, lots of universities over here, and if they'll allow part time work, I can work as an instructor. If it is something related to technology courses, I can work in a lab assistant. So depends what type of requirements they have in case if they have it and if the allow part time. "
Si,"	They wanted me to move. My my mother, she's a retired professional professional in the sense, she was a principal in one of the school. My father… My father was a working In the government, he’s a government servant. My parents both were working.. Now they're retired. I have two younger brothers who both are into IT and the other one is into CA. So, like my family is a working family and, like, educated family. So, even though I'm I'm 33 right now and single, they allowed me to take my own decision and they said and it is your choice - you decide. If you want to be independent, go and live your life, do whatever you want. There was no pressure at all to get married and all. There was no pressure at all since, since if I talk about my mom… after getting married. At that time, she had just completed her graduation. After she got married, and after five days, she went for higher studies. My father and my father family allowed her to go do her higher studies. So two years she was away from her family. [Laughs] And she is the first person at my in my native to be a teacher. Like 30- 35 years back. So, we belong to a Maharashtrian community. I come from Mumbai so Mumbai is a part of Maharashtra and I come from a Maharashtrian community where we have mainly farming and so even in my native place, there are very few people who are educated and from my native theyve come to Mumbai. So, My father has come to like 35 or 40 years back. So, there were like 10 to 12 people... mainly guys only who moved from that city and they came to Mumbai, and then they started working and. The native city is Sangli. "
Si,"	I have like, two of my best friends, school friends. They moved to Toronto, two years back. So but they didn't have any idea related to educational institute and how… what is the process and all but my friends, friend … a colleague, since she is working in Toronto, so she had, she had this particular friend. He studied in the same college, he completed his course and now he has moved to Toronto for work. So she told him that my friend is looking for some study opportunities in Canada so can you help her out? She's into the technical field and all and he said that why don't you consider this particular college since you don't…if  you don't want a long term studies. You want a one year course only. So this college offers one year course. So ask her to go to through the website and check it out. So she told me.. On 5th of Jan she told me about this. I checked the website and all.  She spoke to me in the morning around 10 to 11 o'clock. I just surf the website I spoke with my parents and they were like go ahead. So, in one and a half hour I decided which course I want to get into. I spoke with the college, like I wrote a mail to the college stating this all I'm interested into. Is there any  seat available. So the college sent me a list like you have to go through this particular process, then only you will get an offer letter and so by March end and I completed the requirement like giving the English test and gathering my documents and paying the registration fees and all. So the moment I got my IELTS result.. I got it in first week of March. Though I decided in one and a half hour about the college, but I took time to first understand the city, what are the different options regarding the same course, what other colleges are there. So I didn't find those that are… like there are colleges like McGill university, it is very much famous in history. But again, it didn't offer one year course. So it was offering a master course, two years, of course, and one year of work. So I spoke with my parents said, you already have a engineering degree. And you already have 10 years of work. And it depends upon you if you're selecting a 2 year course. And then again, one year of work experience, so my mom compared it with her experiences. After marriage, she did 2 years of studies and then she worked. So she told me what are the problems she faced, when you were studying and you are already married? And in my case, I was not married, I'm not married. So she said what are the problems, What are the things you will face so you decide whether you want to take a one year of studies, like a gap, one year full of concentration on studies. And then you decide to take your life ahead - marriage, ofr work which city, what you want to do and all instead of spending three years on education and then deciding. So, by the time you will be 38-39. So, what will be the life ahead? One year is fair enough for me to explore the city to understand myself and see how I take my life ahead."
Si,"	So, as of now Im only into it for two three days. So, what I have observed is in trains and all the instructions are also in French. Even the bill which we get the grocery bill, those are also in French. So, the technology is so, what do you say, it is helpful you just download google translate into you know, French dictionary and you come to know what it is exactly. But what I feel is if you are migrating from one place to another place, you should be adaptable to that particular place. So, I should have done a French course earlier… I should have done it, at least the basic so that by communicating... I would be able to communicate with people or when I when my roommates and they're applying for a job. So, they are also like technical people. So, when they are going for some job opportunities, they go they do the interviews also and then in the end they come to know that they need bilingual people. Which is also pretty much perfect. Why? Because if they are working for a, working as a customer sales representative and if the client is speaking in French, and if they're not able to handle their query, so then what is the point? So they need to be equipped with the language also. So that is a problem which they are also facing so that the government is providing French education. So for students, for immigrants, free education is given. So we can take help from that. We are into this country, the country is also giving us so much facilities so it should not be a problem. "
Si,	The visa process… I took time. I got my offer letter in April end. But I applied for my
Si,"	A lot of opportunities are available for skilled migrants. Im skilled – you go into any part of the world, you are into technology space, the world works around in different domains. So whether you are coming from an Asian country or European country, if you are, you have a background of a technology, the technology is going to be same everywhere. It might happen that that country might have an advanced technology. But there might be some places where the basic is required. So according to that, I do consider myself that I am skilled. In my country, I might be at the higher post, but over here, that particular profile, I won't be getting into this country, the profiles. The technology which is being used, it might have might have gone to the next level. So I can join from the starting level. I think even if I'm switching from one role to another role I need to start from scratch only. I can't say that I was Highly skilled at this role. So when I'm switching to the next role role, give me give me the position at that place, like at par. It can't happen. It never happens."
Si,"	In my case, what I did after working in the industry for 10 years, I wanted a freedom kind of thing, I didn’t want to do nine to five jobs. So luckily what I did I worked for an NGO. So I worked for NGO for one and a half year. And so, over over there I understood what is the exact need of like, imparting technologies like what will be the use of technology. When you're working into the industry, you're working for another client, those are also technology driven. But the NGOs, they are not that much as par with the technology. So, they are into like basic, below basic level you can say. So, these are the people these are these are the sectors which needs to be, what you say, brought up. So, luckily I worked for 2 NGOs. Then this particular opportunity came up. So then I said that you have given enough time for the NGOs. And now let's consider, let's go to the next level, move from one place to another place, then let's, let's explore life. So, 10 years of, you can say, machine life, then one and a half year of new new life in the sense …into an environment which is not technology driven, social life, social life. So, over there also I faced problems in the sense that there were people who were not that much technology driven so they need to be explained and then then they were supposed to understand each and everything. So again, it was it was difficult. It was stressful because for them to know, the scrums and all, that is all new but for us we are used to it. When you're working we are used to it and then we get irritated, like “why I have to explain you each and everything again and again”. But for them it is new. So, I found those kind of problems over here, but then I learned patience. Actually, I have learned patience. Like how to understand how to explain a layman. What all things you're doing day in and out. So, I thought the same thing I tried with my family. I thought first I started explaining things to my dad. This is how my life has been for whatever new thing I have to get into, my family was like lets first explore, first understand it so that when you when you step out in the world you know that you will know what are the things, what are the problems that you will have so let's discuss in the family. Yeah so luckily I have that kind of family. My parents are they know what are the future things like what are the future problems my child will face so they used to prepare us in that way so from school colleges and all. In school also like while going to the college This is how the world is already in the most to travel, these are all the things you need to do on your own. So they started preparing us two years prior only and then they told us now go and step into the world. So they're [parents] calling every 15 minutes. So for them, they also sleep as per Canada time. Theyre worried. But now that they're like… before coming here I spoke to them and they were like “very good, go out and speak and meet people and understand them”. And let's see. For the, it is always like they should be, they should be aware of what she is doing and whatnot. And for me, it is like, for the first time was like an independent life. Though there were no restrictions. But always I knew that if I'm stuck, I have my brother. I have my mom and dad to help me. But now since you said that you share the Google Map and I will not know how to understand it and all. And so then I thought of connecting with my brother because what is that you did? But I landed over here. Like in Mumbai, we are used to Uber. So I was just looking at the options but then I realized that I don't have the data pack. I don't have the internet and so I just did my roaming. On roaming, so he just called me and he said what? I don't know. I will just wait and I will let me understand it. Then he texted me that these are all the steps are supposed to do and this is how I landed to this place.  So at times also when when I'm in the room, there it India also it would pretty much be the 5 of them so mostly speaking to them only. I have less friends. So you're also sometimes like sometimes like ….most of the time I feel lonely, like no one to talk to. But then through whatsapp and facebook, theyre connected to me. So ideally what they will do they will record a message…they will record a video and they will send me, like “what you're doing and all so that I don't feel lonely that I would feel that yes Okay. So in a night It's morning over there over there so I'll keep on doing those videos so that I don't feel homesick. So it is like when you have a conversation, a telephonic conversation so that during that part when you have those people contact. But they decided this idea of having a video recording, the video every now and then. So even after the conversation is done like after one hour or two hours you feel lonely again, just go and see the video. So, you feel that he is he is there in front you."
Si,"	So Jan 2019 I came to know about the option, the study option. So that same time I thought of considering the work option, like work visa, if I could get a work visa since I have the relevant experience and about PR, PR option as well. So work option, not possible from the home country. I didn't apply. I have friends working over here and they said that you need a Canadian experience and then only you can get an opportunity over here. And so I didn't give a thought about it. So not possible from home country without local work experience. And PR – current score – so mainly age factor – then I had the marital status. So when youre married you get your partner's points, like primary applicant and secondary applicant and the scores can be added up. So because of these two factors, otherwise the rest of the factors were good. But these 2 factors affected my score. Then I considered studies. "
Si,"	Nothing. I didn’t pay for anything. The website is very much clear. They mentioned what all you have to do. So, I didn’t pay for anything. Neither for my visa process also. I just applied for the IELTS, there are a lot of materials available on internet, A lot of forums which you can print out. Okay for the exam I had done the payment, but not for the training. People are paying for the training. The visa fees I paid, the medical test fees I had paid. So for the study option I need to get my transcript. I got the transcript in 2 weeks so in Jan itself I got my transcript. Then I did my IELTS registration so the fees I paid. This happened in Feb 2019. I got my result in... I cleared my IELTS exam. This happened in March 2019.  Then I submitted all the documents…submitted relevant documents I will write…to the college April 2019. And I got my letter of acceptance…acceptance I got in April itself. So after I got my letter of acceptance, then the college had mentioned those steps that I need to follow after getting acceptances I need to take permission from Quebec so there is one documentation, CAQ certificate you need to get. Quebec province says that if you want to come to our province, then you need to have a permission. So, you need to have the certificate. So I applied for the certificate and in total four weeks to be processed and then I got the acceptance. This was like $5000 or $6000 rupees. So it’s the ministry of Quebec. We need to write that we are intending to come to the province for studies since this is a French speaking province in the country so – rest all the provinces, they are majorly English speaking. This is the only province which has the French as the major language. So they need from like, they asked people the permission. So then they gave me the permission saying that yes, you are allowed for studies. So I had to do the CAQ… applied in April in 2019. I got a reply that was positive. I got it in May 2019. After that I was asked to pay fees and then the security funds. GIC loan. Paid half or 6 months tuition fees. That I did in May itself, May 2019. Paid my GIC amount. This is an investment certificate which we need to as a student you're supposed to do. Well you're saying that this is the fund which I have. So in case, its kind of security fund which you are putting in, so that in case is in the future if you don’t have any funding, you don't rely on government for funding because government provides facilities to PR to their citizens also. But we are coming from outside countries as students so they cannot accommodate us to have any support. So this is $10000. It is self funded. So there are Scotiabank and there are some other banks also. One other bank has started it otherwise before it was Scotiabank only. So $10,000 which we are paying, every month the government gives us back. So, this is divided into 12 months. So government gives you back so that you can bear your expenses and everything. It's not like you’re relying on the government. Like youre not homeless, you don’t have anything to do and all. The government has decided that youre coming to the country, you’re coming for your studies, you pay the security funds and then utilise that when you’re staying here. So it took one month to get my certificate and all. So after May, one month I took a break because I had everything, I just had to apply for my visa. For my visa I had all the documents and all, so I took a break, I went to see all Maharashtra. So I explored the different cities in Maharashtra. It was awesome. I never knew in my life that there was all these cities. I went to Aurangabad, and Sherdi religious place and I explored Pune with my family. It was a family holiday. Then my native place also, Sangli. Then met all my relatives at all before moving out of the country. So I met everyone. Then I applied for the visa in July… and receive visa in July itself. I applied on the 3rd of July. I got it in three weeks."
Si,"	So basically I used Google website, college website, CIC website. So source is nothing but Google. So basically CIC website is good enough. What I found if you go into the forums there are multiple people who will put their questions. So you will find lot of discrepancy because their experiences and your experiences, there is a lot of difference. So instead of getting confused, you go to the CIC website and then and you have they have a questionnaire and answers provided. So you can do that. CIC website. For transcript, I connected with my college, my college website to understand how I will get the transcript and all. This I got from British Council. I gave an offline exam so it took 14 days for my result to come.  So I submitted my documents. My college had sent me the link.. so here they have a Google form. They have that drive Google Drive on that you are supposed to submit the documents. CAQ also I was supposed to create an account on the website…on the government website. Plus, they mail you the letter. Post the letter.  So you have a physical copy. So what happens when they send you an electronic copy it can be editable. Here it is a certificate. So the certificate can be mishandled it can be edited and all. So they send a physical copy. So this copy is required at the airport, it is required at the immigration and all. When I landed, I have to show it at the airport then I was directed to the immigration section, because this is the permission. I used Facebook for understanding the city – city knowledge. Lot of information I got from Facebook for instance it is a historical place, regarding the weather, what are the different places in Montreal, how is the weather, how to cope up with the weather. They have videos which have been posted. There are hashtags. I use Facebook, Instagram, I follow the mtl blog. Im following the account of my college so I was pretty much updated about things happening other activities are happening in my college. I came here on 9th of  October so 1st of October they had a visit the college whichever student they had for June intake and all.. They took those students for a city tour so I got to learn about all this activities, extracurricular activities, colleges networking activities, that I came to know from their Instagram handle. So college and MTL blog – these are the 2 things that I am following. Plus I'm very much into yoga. So the people who are in this city who does Yoga and all, Im following their accounts and then this one thing I follow – Sri Ravi Shakankar – Art of living. This is one Instagram handle. So what they do they conduct a meditation and yoga session. twice in a week, like bi-weekly. This coming Sunday they have a session. So FB and Instagram is more than enough. WhatsApp – video and voice call. So instead of using Skype and all Whatsapp is really good because for Skype the other person needs to have it and all. With Whatsapp your phone is registered and off you go. You have Google Maps very much essential when you are traveling to other country and the city, the country from where you come, you have good transportation facility like train, you have cab you have rickshaws available. But it is not necessarily these facilities will be available in the other country. "
Si,"	So this is self-funding then sponsored by dad. That’s it. Since he’s retired, he has his retirement fund so that is being utilised. Yeah lot of, umm, when I thought of studies like when I confirm with studies, I wanted to know the culture… like how is the technological culture in the city. So I enrolled to meetup. Yeah, went to this app …meetup app. On that I connected with Montreal Analytics team. Then I connected with women in machine learning and artificial intelligence. This is one community which is doing good work. We're working on this. So, these are the apps that keep on posting the meetups that they conduct. So these are the 2 groups. This is an NGO. So, when I'm when I'm in the city, and I don't have things to do on weekends, or whatever, I need to meet with people, I need to understand the culture I need to understand the technology space. So I'll be going to these meetups and I will be interacting with the people. Oh, that's this is that because Did you go to any meetups yet? Not as of now. I have like I said yoga. Yeah, art of living. So that is happening on Sunday 20th 20th of October. So I'll be going over there. But it also helped me to find out the relevant accommodations and all. Ill be meeting people who are already in Montreal. Students who are already in Montreal. They might help me out. For accommodation, what I have observed over here…whichever buildings are there, so they have already posted if there are vacant flats that are available in that building. So the posters are already available, you just scan the code and physical posters are there, you just scan the code and it redirects you to that website and you come to know if there are rooms available in this. You just connect with them or fill the form and then accordingly, they will reply. So maybe QR code will come somewhere and at the end here, looking for accommodation. So this is all before arrival. Now I can create a map after arrival. So for arrival I will start with airport. So at airport what was required is a token needed to be created that is a profile is created yeah profile of passengers are created. Then the next your CAQ is checked. Your visa is checked. You are redirected to Immigration Department. And then you get your visa permit, here you get your visa – after the immigration. You don't get a visa until you actually arrive. The work permit is after studies. The college mentions that since you are studying over here you can work part time so that is implicit. 20 hours a week. VFS just provided with the visa…visa number. See that is just a number. So, when you come to their country and whatever number you have, based on that number the immigration team understands that these are students, these for study, these are for work, these are for PR. Then they give you the documents. So I got a stamp saying student. So I got my study permit and I was out… out of the airport [laughs]. So very much clear process and staff is very cordial. You need to create your own profile. So there are 15 to 20 computers available. You can do it in five to seven minutes your token is created you after that you have two people who will be checking your certificate, the check it, they tell you to go to the immigration and immigration section there are seven to eight people desks, so even if there are 20 people, each persons check is done in 5 minutes. This is very good over here. They do ask… the immigration people do ask what is your accommodation? Where are you going to stay? Where are you going to go from here? So that is being checked – accommodation and address is checked. We call it as reference. So yeah this would go before. Submitted my file. Visa was approved in July. It takes 2 days to come from Delhi to Mumbai. So, after that I connected with my friends for temporary accommodation. So, I had two months – August, September. So it happened that earlier I was supposed to go to another place and there, there was no vacancy. And in September's first week, it was already occupied. So, then I had to search for another place. So eventually this is the 3rd friends room where I have a like, they accommodated me. 2 months it took me, like I was I was in a dicey position, like where I will stay, where I will stay.. Firstly I was searching for accommodation on Facebook, Kijiji app, Airbnb and all. But eventually I got it through a friend. Accommodation and then I got a cab, Because the address was already given to me. And from airport, this location, it takes 20 minutes. And then they came to receive me near the entrance of the building. Everything is on your mobile phone. Just imagine if you don’t have an internet connection, you are gone. I did my international roaming but I didn’t use the data services. So I did that now, like I got my college registration done, my bank accounts, Then I've got my phone, took another SIM card here and I hot my social insurance number also. I went first I went to the College. So, what I did, in one day itself I did everything - services. So, I had my college registration, in that same building, so college registration is on the first floor, Scotiabank at ground floor. Then there is mall over here. Eaton Mall.. there I took my SIM card, so which is like five minutes away – Sim card - and then I went to Service Canada for my sin number. So this all happened in a span of three hours. So that is the beauty of government working over your. Actually, this is on do in your country. In 2-3 hours, you cant do it. You need three days and all these places are very much nearby. Otherwise in my in my country or my city I need to travel from one place to another place. So, traveling is like 30 minutes, one hour, two hours. "
Si,"	It is, it is pretty much clear that this immigration…like permanent immigration can happen provided whatever is the score at that time…after two years, or after one year of studies. What is the immigration status, so it all depends upon that time, but I know the basic basic thing that I know if I want to immigrate to Canada, there are certain things, rules in the sense.. So age factor, marital status, your Canadian studies, Canadian work experience, So after completing my studies, if I if I fit into the age factor, if I fit into the marital status so that point is going to be constant. My Canadian work experience might add some points my Canadian studies will add some points. And if I get a score, and that score is as par with the CRS score, So I can get PR. It all depends upon future. "
Si,"	Moving to another country and as a single person, it is very obvious you would like to interact with people, you would like to get into a relationship, but it all depends upon how it happens. And since there's a new country, new place, basically Montreal – this is like a French speaking province, so there will be a language barrier. So I don't know how it will happen."
Si,"	It doesn’t matter and it didn't matter when I was in my country also. In fact it would be very good if I didn’t marry an Indian person [laughs]. Because when you are thinking of settling,  you have already taken a decision of moving from one country to another country. So your mindset is about exploring the places, so why not exploring relationships and why not exploring this aspect of your personal life also? Like, in my case, 33 half of my life I've spent in one country and didn’t do this… I was in a relationship and things couldn’t work out. So I couldn't take our decision to get married. So now, now, my mindset is here I have like, I don't have a burden of working. It is pretty much clear that I'm studying I have, so I will be having some time on the weekends. So it all depends upon my study schedule and how it is, I need to have, like, I have to say, in my bucket list, I have made sure that I'm going to go out and meet people, which I have not done in my work life, like for 10 years, or employed so that I have to do it over here, because what I feel is this is the one year which I've got. I've got it from my family as well as the opportunity I've got to understand myself and take a step on it. Tinder I have used in my country. It is of no use and the app has a very negative response and all. I don't know about other apps. On Facebook, you guys come to mobile lot of apps and all like, okay, okay. Okay. See the love that you have. But I don't want to rely on those apps. What I feel is if you start socializing, you start meeting new people like I have an opportunity to. I can meet someone in my college also. And I'm like, I'm a big fan of Shahrukh Khan. So I will tell you one experience Yeah. So like from I'm a die hard fan Shahrukh Khan. So before coming on the last day for my friend's birthday, they prepared one slam book. So the last page was Shahrukhs pic and my pic. So they had written a message that hope hopefully you will, you will meet him some day. So what happened when I went when I went to my college for registration, my college is at the first floor. So there was one guy. I just entered the lift so there was myself and two guys who live. So one of the guy he spoke to another guy, he said… he was greeting him hello. So the other guy told him Do you know me? He said yes, we met at Apple. So then he introduced himself, “I'm Shahrukh” [laughs]. So when he introduced himself he said “Im Shahrukh and Im from Pakistan”. And Im like Shahrukh!!! [Laughs]. After 10 minutes I just messaged my friend I said that you wrote in the slam book that I will meet Shahrukh and I met Shahrukh in my college. So you know Bollywood movies? So Shahrukh’s last movie was jab Harry Met Sejal. So in that, the tagline and what you seek is seeking you. [laughs] So, my friends, everyday they message me and say – did you meet Shahrukh? I am like, no I haven’t gone to the college again but I'm very much eager. So what happened after the lift… I went to my college and did all the process. Then I have one of my student is working over here. So he told me that why don’t you come to McDonalds? So, I went to McDonalds and Shahrukh had come to McDonalds as well. So I was telling my friends that you’ve written in my slam book and I have met Shahrukh. It is not Shahrukh Khan but it is Shahrukh. I am following him… not following him, like seeing him but he doesn’t know that this girl is looking at me.  So that gives me a high point over there okay fine. I can look around people and I can meet people and people oh you're a very positive, very cordial…like they speak… they are very friendly. Even at stores, I went to all the government offices and the life was very easy. Otherwise when you go to a government office in your country, first of all you feel scared then the second thing is you’re already scared, and then people don't talk properly. They talk rudely. And also First of all you’re scared, you're not that ready you take elder person from your family to go to the government office and then your attitude and their attitude dont match. So it's your family members always say that whenever you're going to a government office make sure you're taking an elder person who has very good high level of patience because its a government office. If you speak rudely and if you speak with your attitude, the work is not going to happen. So take someone who is elder and who has very good level of patience. That thing I didn’t observe over here. It was a good thing and I was little bit sceptical.. if they ask some questions that I'm not able to answer or it might happen I might get hyper and all. Even my family was amazed that in three hours you did all these things and that too being alone. Im like yes, I did it. [laughs]. "
Si,"	Touch wood - my flow was very much clear and it was step by step because when I see other people, like my roommates also, they had a very tough immigration process in India. So, they had their visa rejection also happened and all. So in my case, what I observed is they, they were not having that much knowledge. So, luckily, in my case what I did before applying even everything, I made sure that I have 75% of the knowledge regarding what I'm doing next. So, even I was thinking that 25% I might go wrong, but 75% I have a knowledge about this. This also.. the government work and all… I made sure that I read proper content and then I went to them, again French people in the offices, there were talking in French. So, I made sure that how to greet them in French. I made sure those I know those words their accent I need to understand and all what I observed when I went to Service Canada My name they pronounced in another way. Even there were people sitting so the pronunciation of the name was very much different so there were some two three people the name was called several times but they couldn’t understand that their name is being called. So its all like how adaptable you are  and how you're prepared… t"
Si,"	The biggest challenge observed was in Frankfurt – in my layover. So my flight was delayed from Mumbai. So, I had a span of like 30 minutes to move from that, that section to my boarding session, so I had to run like anything. So I thought that Oh my God, if I missed this flight, what was going to happen? I didn't knew what what would be the next options and all and the funds are not there. So even in your country, if you could happen that you miss a train, a flight or a bus, you know that you have funds, you will do something about it. And no internet or no internet connection. And the mind was also not working like what am I going to do. Like, I met a guy. He helped me because he was also moving to that same gate. So he helped me. He helped me a lot into that. We both were running and all and like in 20 minutes I reached there. Even the airport staff, they were good. But they also couldn’t do anything because I had to run anyhow, I had to rush. That was the biggest challenge. Because at that time even thinking now is like if I couldn't make it in in that 30 minutes then what next. Those 30 minutes were like, something… Then when I was sitting in the flight I was thinking, what if I missed it. When I came over here and shared this with my family and my brother was like there is no problem. You are supposed to go to the airport authority the whichever like I came from, I took Lufthansa, So just go to their section. So then they will book another flight or they would have contacted India or they would have… like something could have been done. I was like this option, at that point, I wouldn't think of. And this was the first international flight so I never knew that this all options are there. So its good that I am moving out and when other members of my family will move, they are well equipped with all this possibilities. They also helped me a lot. And I'm like lucky that they knew that these all possibilities would come. So they were prepared with this and we were doing it because they also connected with their friends and they did the research and all. I was very much relying on my family that yes, if nothing could happen, yes, they are there they will help me anyhow and they will do it."
Da,"	Okay, so like if you're asking me exactly for vacations or you just want me to just tell you like exactly when I actually moved? So, when I'm came for vacation that was when I was maybe like 10 years old. Okay. was a long time ago. Right now I'm 22. So I'm guessing like the 2010. Yeah. And it's only for vacation. So we just came. So my mom, married. Sorry, my mom met this guy back in 2010. And he was in the in the business kind of thing. She went and met his boyfriend at that time. And then, like, they got a connection. And then they had like, it was like, sorry, my English is so bad. So basically what happened is like, they meet and then they start talking to each other. And then they have a really good deep relationship. So it was like a long distance relationship kind of thing. It was really good. I mean, we love the guy. I mean, he was really good with us. He was cool with her. And he always invited us to Canada. The first time I went to Canada, it was in Alberta, no, sorry, it was Qcebec. "
Da,"	Yeah. So he went for vacations. And my mom was going for a business trip. Oh, so they met in there and then they had a connection and it was awesome. Then they started like having going deeper in their relationship. And then we started going together. We went to Quebec as a family, my brother, me and my mom and him. And we went to a sister in Quebec, and it was amazing. I love that place. And we always have the opportunity to say like, this is an amazing country. We should live here right? Yeah. We never came across. It was only got like, kind of like a vacation kind of thing right. Then after that, when we came it was in Alberta, again with my mom and then I came with just myself. My brother, I think he stayed in Mexico. And that was in 2000… You're making me think…. long time. I think it was in 2012. We come back to Alberta. We went to Banff. It was beautiful. We stay there for a long time. And then after that, we came... My mom stay there from Mexico. We stay there for a little time. And then they decided to just get married. That was in 2015. So, after three years, they they after the relationship was good and everything. They broke up, I think, for one or two years. And that was like the gap of a few years they broke off and then they came back. And then he decided to say like, hey, like, you know what, let's get married. Bring Dante, bring everything. Let's just go there. And my mom asked me she was like, What do you think? And that was I was 17 by the time. So, it was kind of like a hard decision. Yeah. Like, it wasn't like kind of like, I was so excited. You know, like when they tell you 17 go to the new Canada and new country. And mean it was so good. And I love to, like, I loved this country. Like when I met them here, everything what I did and here in Canada when I was on vacation, I was like, Yes, I wanna live here. So yes, I came in 2015 when I when I moved."
Da,"	So one of the main problems was, I guess it was school wise. So because we don't we didn't know what's going to happen, right. I was in in high school at that time in Mexico City. Okay, so I was kind of like finishing in my second year of high school. I wasn't doing that great to be honest with you. Yeah. I wasn't doing great in school. At that time. I was like, mostly partying, you know, in high school, partying, friends going out and everything. So my mom told me like, it's a big decision, you know? She lost her job. So, it was a good thing for her. Like, she, she she lost it. So I'll tell you what was the behind of it. So my mom, she worked for a pharmaceutical for maybe 16 years. A long time. She got a good job and she got to pay. We live really good play with all the time was private schools in Mexico City. We got like a really good life. And my mom, she always worked hard for stuff. She was a lonely parent. And so she was it was really complicated for her right. But at the end of the day, she did it. She brought two kids. So both of us were really. Right now at this time, so I'm like she's proud of us and I'm proud of my mom. Right? And she was the main. She's the still one of my thoughts that she makes me keep going. right. Um, she, after she lost her job, it was so hard for her to actually find another job. So, because of her age, right, in Mexico City is really hard to actually find a job as a woman and as a as your age, right? Like, they don't take you seriously. My mom is an accountant and she has her degree. She was she's a professional worker. And unfortunately, she couldn't find a job. But she find a job good job. Like when she was in the middle of when she broke up with, with Frank, or with his ex-husband. And it was a good job too. And she she loved the job. She She liked it. And she was like, Well, I'm gonna stay here right? When this person actually offer us to go to Canada. It was a big deal too for her. There was a lot of problems. The thing is first, her job, then my school that was one of the important things because I'm 17 right so I have to go with her. It's not like a question on matter to say like, oh, you're staying here in Mexico and then I'll go there. No, it's like a family thing like to bring everything from there right? In Mexico for her was really it was like that's why she asked me because she told me like, well, you're not going to have school. You're going to finish your a year and then I might lose I'm gonna lose my job and here and also the problem was the house. She has a house she owns a house in Mexico, and it's with my my dad. Right? Unfortunately with my dad she always have problems with him. So it's kind of like…it was it was kind of hard and that time I guess. I'll say one of the motivations… that basically what you asked it was…we needed like a clean slate. I think we was an escape, you know. I think my mom was tired of it. She saw an opportunity to live with someone with… her love of life. And to bring me there. I think it was a plus too, right? I mean, I didn't say no, I just, I was so excited about it. I think I saw a great opportunity to be here. I mean, I even invested like, into my research and everything. And I thought, like, you know what, it is a good opportunity, you know what I mean? Like, I could finish school in there. I didn't thought that it was like, kind of like a much of a loss. But now that I think it is, we lost a lot of things… we lost…it's a culture wise. I mean, it was a change of culture. It was a change of people. It was a change, a family, it was change of everything that was surrounded by us, right. And it was just taken away. Right. Like, for me, my perspective was taken away and then just coming through the country, right. So yeah, I think that's that's one of the things that I don't know if I answer your question, but I don't know like"
Da,"	The thing that I find most interesting in this in this country is that they don't accept anything that is from Mexico. So, so any any background or anything that you have or anything like that, it's just like zero. Like when you come here, it's just you start like again. Yeah, so when I came here to to Edmonton, I thought, like, okay, so I have in my high school, can you accept my two years and say, No, you have to do an exam. And then from that exam, we will put you somewhere. Unfortunately, when I went to high school in that time, I was 18. So I was 17 at that time when we moved in, but then I turned 18 right away, right. So in the laws in there and Edmonton unfortunately when you are a 18, you're not you're not a dependent, right? So the reason why we have to move that fast is because I had to be with my mom when 17. Right? Because otherwise they wouldn't take me. They wouldn't say like, No, he's an adult, he has to make his own application. So for the application, that's the whole reason why they took me when I was 17. Right. After when I was 18 in there, they don't accept any high school students. Thankfully, I don't know how but like my like how the school was in Mexico. It actually like my level. It wasn't that bad. I was like, almost finishing. When I came here, I did my high school, maybe one year. I didn't finish high school. It was an option. The reason why is because I saw an opportunity and I plan it. My plan was to basically to only finish the courses that I need to go to college right? from college, go to university. That was my whole point and my mom agree with it. And even her husband agreed, Right. And he was like, Yeah, that's a great idea. I mean, and I was going to the trades kind of thing. environment. And that's the whole reason why I took that that path, right? unfortunately didn't work. It didn't work as well as I thought but yeah, like I did. I only have I don't have my high school diploma. But I have the like, the knowledge of it, basically. So I have the courses to actually go to college? If I want to go to college right now, I can, because in here the system… they only asked you for something. Like if you have math and English passed… then you can go to college. You don't need to have a high school diploma. Right. You only need a high school diploma if you want to go to university, right. So in my thought it was like, at that time, I was thinking about the price, right? So university’s really expensive. Yeah, right. So I was thinking so I can get college. And then once I go to college, then I can go to I can pay less. Then once it pay less, and then after the year and I become a permanent resident and everything, I will pay less for university. So on time being, I can actually be in college and then go to university. So that was a whole point. So that was the that was my thinking, right? Go to college, pay less. And then after I have my degree or something, I will go to university. It was a good plan at the time. But like, if you're asking me for any professional background, I don’t have any. "
Da,"	So how that happened? So basically, in the bank, they don't ask you for for that. They don't ask you for high school diploma. So and it's about experience and much more about customer service. I think I learned a lot. I have a lot of experience. And that's what actually taught me. I've been working in the customer service …in the industry for a long time. And I think I know how to do it Good. I guess sometimes when I don't know if you heard that before, when people they tell you like, you don't need education for actually be successful. And, and it is true. I mean, it's about how you have a connection with people and how you actually can interact with them. Right. So I learned that and it been helping me for a long time, right. So yeah, and I was actually trying to go to do the school. My thinking is still going to school because I do still want to go to school. Next year, I'm planning to go to school… to university or to college. Well, first to college and and you know, right so, but I'm still debating which where to go right. "
Da,"	It was actually really fast. It was in a one year period. Because my mom plan it really good with him, okay, and they plan it in a way that we can actually move together as a family. Right. So it was not a big planning on my on my way. I did, I have to do a lot of things right. Like I had to finish a lot of things in Mexico City. I had to finish my degrees in there from high school before I actually leave, my passports I have to do all I have to do all by myself, because my mom was working at the time. So I actually helped my mom to do all those kind of like, paperwork, paperwork. And she was she was she needed the help. So she was so happy about that. Right. I helped her for a lot of things, because most of the things were in English, so I had to translate for her and I did explain her and detail what actually the things they need. Mostly we did them… I think it we would have planned in, we wouldn’t be here if I if I'm honest with you. If we wouldn't make that rush decision, I don't think we would’ve been here. The non-planning worked, I think, I think in in this sense yes. Because if we would have seen maybe like in, in a long term kind of thing, I think we, I would’ve said no. Or my mom would say no too. After all that we have struggled. And after all that we have seen and what we've gone through, I think I would say no. And my mom, the same. I think we would be better in Mexico. "
Da,"	Not like life wise, but we would never go through that stage. I mean, through that period of time. I like, I didn't like that struggle to be honest with you. "
Da,"	Yeah. So I'll explain. So I'll tell you the story, basically. So what happened is that he married she married. My mom married this guy. They've been together for maybe six years. Their relationship was good. Everything was amazing. Like we went to trips together. He came to Mexico. We have always good time. We have fun with him, right? I even see him as a dad sometimes, right? Like, I did like him and it hurts me because he's now that I think about it. It's just like, I lost two father figures, right? Like one that I like, my my dad that doesn't recognize me as a son. And then the other one…that I thought, I could have a dad and then it just got taken away, right. So basically what happened is like after a year, we live in there. It was a struggle with him. I guess the reason why I think he lost, he lost his job in Edmonton. So he was living by his pension, and he just got divorced recently, too. And then he lost half of his money right with his ex-wife. So everything was really tight with him, like with kind of money wise. At the beginning it wasn't. At the beginning, everything was perfect. Like maybe the first four, three months. It was really good.  I didn't complain when my mom didn't complain or anything. But we thought that we had a future in there with him. We were planning, like planning about all these things… school, I was planning about my school, I was planning for a lot of things. Then it got to a point where money was one of the main problems. So I had to start working. I work as a bartender back in Edmonton. First as a busboy, you know, bussing tables, and my manager loved me. So, all the servers love me too. They love the way I interact with clients. So, they told me Hey, you want to be a bartender? I was like, Yeah, for sure. So, I started being a bartender. I love that job. I love the people that I met in there it was so nice. I I was feel at home. I met some… so good friends in Edmonton and I still talk to them. I mean, I miss them. My best friends I ever had. Then after that, we lost... He was getting into a depression kind of mode. Because he was at home every day. So because he doesn't have job doesn't have nothing to do, right. So he was getting into that mode and he was really, really depressed. It got to a point that like food, like it was the even shorter. Like literally he was basically like, no, like, you can't eat that much. Why you eat that much? Like, you’re wasting money, you're wasting this and it was always a struggle. My mom didn't like that either. My mom she suffer a lot with him I say…just just going back you just reminded me like, How does she like deal with it? Right? So when they married, my mom did everything for love. She… She didn't expect anything back. She didn't do anything. Like, she didn't want anything. Like back she didn't want any money. Nothing right. She even signed a prenup for him. So if anything happens like she would never have it, right, that's how much she loved, right? Unfortunately, like we didn't knew about this…because we trusted him. But he did something like inside that… basically said like, you cannot have anything like, like it was it was really bad, that prenup. So we got into the point that my mom was trying to just suck it up just for me. So, she was thinking like Okay, I'm gonna suck it up for a year and then we can stay here, we get the papers and then we can figure out something out. This is for the permanent residence because we apply as a sponsorship.  So he was our sponsor for me and my mom. Yeah. And basically, that's that's what happened, right? So then, it was really, it was really hard like my mom and him they never speak. My mom sometimes had to sleep in floor and had to do some stuff. She was.. she didn't like.. She always… she's she's a happy person, right? So she always go out to, always go out to be like, you know, I'm gonna go out she did. She loved working with kids, so she even volunteered for that. And she'd go out and help kids and everything right? I always go to work, school. I was doing part time, and part time, at the time. And I was really I was doing really good. I was focusing on my studies and I was looking after my work too. I loved it. I was really good in English in Edmonton and I was really surprised. I was like, wow, like, I was like, Wow, really, really good. And that's, for some reason. I was like, wow. In Mexico I was really bad but now in Canada, I'm really good for some reason. What happened? [laughs] you know. But yeah, after that, then he decided to… One month…he was like, kind of, like suspicious kind of away. So he, he was like, basically telling my mom like, threatening her like, you know what, Im gonna cancel the visa, Im going to cancel the papers. We never thought about that. I even told my mom, she would ask me like, can he do it? and I was like, “yes, he can, but I don't think he would. So, one day he comes, and I think ie was like, mostly the economical stress and maybe the depression that he has, because he was looking for a job at that time and he couldn't find it. Like he wanted the same pay and the same things and you would never get something because he didn't have like the diploma. So, like experience unfortunately, doesnt pays you off. That's why I want my papers [laughs]. You know, unfortunately, But yeah, I mean, one day he came in, he just said, so I cancelled the papers. So he didn't even tell us nothing. Apparently, he cancelled it one week before. He was going to the lawyers and he cancelled the whole sponsorship. So he literally went to the thing. And then we've been checked online, we called and they say “yeah, your sponsor just cancelled the application”. So, the case has been closed. So, there's no way that we can help. Because as the rule in Canada once a sponsor cancels, unfortunately, they once they close that file, that’s it. They move to the next one. It is sad. I mean, just like it makes me feel like sometimes they protect more them, their own people than actually us. Right Like as an immigrant…we don't… we didn't came here to do a bad thing. I mean, we were productive. I mean, I was working. My mom was working. My mom…like as a as an accountant, professional accountant, she had to do cleaning floors and everything. Right? We came here we gave everything up from Mexico City just to come here and do all that type of work that we will never came into.. cross our minds, right? So I feel bad about that too for my mom too, because I'm like, all the hard work that you did everything, all the money that you make and everything and it's just for you to start to just working as a cleaning and she was like, I don't care. Like, I'm proud of it. I mean, that's, that's why I love my mom, right like she. Shes just happy. Yeah, so, I mean, and unfortunately, he didn't actually help us out. Because it wasn't like I don't feel like it was like, like he didn't protect us. Like, I feel like in that thing. Canada needs to actually focus on those people too because just by like a snap of a finger, someone just can tell you know, you can go back to your country. 	So it was 2015. He cancelled the papers in 2016. So, in November. So it was basically because you need two years of sponsorship and then you get the PR. So he cancelled it after a year yeah, so he cancelled…that's what I mean it's just like doesn't make sense to me …like someone… and then like he was even so funny because even actually bought the tickets because he actually like, kicked us out of the house because…he literally, one day he's like here is tickets from Mexico City. I don't want you in my house. You have a month leave. I already bought the tickets. That's it. So yeah, so that's what I mean when they when they ….they don't realize people ….they don't realize… like how easily someone can just ruin someone's life and then just decide.. just not to do it. Right. "
Da,"	So we went to a lawyer.Yeah, for sure. We went to a lawyer because we were scared. We didn't know what to do. And my mom, thankfully, she had, she knew a lot of people at that time. So they connected her to them. And she knew a really good lawyer and thanks for her Thank you her! Like, she actually went for it. So, the funny part about that, the lawyer thing of like, the thing that you asked, it is like the system in here is just, it doesn't make sense. Some lawyers, they just give you they just tell you, okay, you can come here, we will charge you this. And they tell you things that …they're not true. They give you misinformation. Most of the lawyers. Thank god this person my mom know her and she was… she knew a lot of cases so my mom she's really careful with that right so she's like okay so because we try others too and they were like, No. And they basically tell us like… no you have to go to your country. You have no options, you have to go. Like you can apply… you don't know English, they are not going to give you an opportunity… Your age is not going to be enough points to actually work for Express Entry. Right? And for me, they told me Yes, he can do it but he has to go to school. He has to start working and once he starts to work after school, then he can apply. And so me and my mom, we decided like you know what, if that happens, then we started saving money. We started saving money for for my school, and then we start saving money for her too in the future, right? Mostly my mom did it for me, for my school because we knew how expensive is going to be the school. Right? And yeah, like, it's just lawyers in here in Canada, they don't actually help you. And that's one of the main problems I think in everywhere in every province and every city, there's one out of 10… that they actually want to actually help you. And they care about what they're doing. Because most of them, they just want….they just want the money, how we're gonna pay them. And then if it gets accepted, that's good. If it doesn't, next. So, I feel bad because I'm one of the lucky ones at least, I got the good advice from a lawyer. And even though like lawyers are so exhausting, like we have to be in the back of them all the time, because they don't do their work. And that's what I told to my mom, you know what, you were paying her money. You need to actually to… Like the word is not claim. Its like demand… You have to demand her to do her job. It's her job but and you're paying for her. Its not like a free service. If its free, okay, I understand. But, they told us… like we never heard about that option.. the humanitarian option. After we explain our story to the lawyer, she was like, you know what, you qualify for doing a humanitarian visa, as a humanitarian basis and you can apply as a PR. She even told us like, it is rare that these cases, that they get accepted. So, it has to be a really hardship… like a really hardship thing that happened to you that they will accept it. Otherwise, they'll not accept it. So we said right. Yeah so that was by the lawyer."
Da,"	When he cancelled… when he actually bought the tickets, we actually… that time the time because he gave us like a short time. So we talked to my brother and he offer us to actually live with him. So that was back in 2016. November, December 2016. "
Da,"	Yeah, I think that we did but it is horrible. Online, the experience is horrible. Our case for some reason it wouldn't show online so we were like in blind form because they don't tell you anything… like normally they say in the website… they say that you can check even on your phone. They give you two options either you go to through phone channel – it takes hours – or online. The problem with online is that our case for some reason in never like…. never like existed in their system for some reason. I don't know why it was just like, wandering around for some reason. So yeah, somewhere. I mean, I hate that online. And I hate the phone chat. I think they're not... When they get them hold of you. They're really nice. And then they give you really good customer service. I have to admit that, but they don't give you no information. They even tell you like we're not gonna give you any information on the trial, you have to wait until actually respond to you, like we're not gonna give you any information at all. The online it gives you a lot of research. But to be honest with you, it's scary to do it by yourself because you can do it you can do the application yourself. Even the government says you can be yourself like you just pay for it and then that's it. But it is a scary because if you miss something, if you use anything, like you say something wrong, or you don't know what actually that question actually means or anything like that - Denied right away and then they give back. So, is it worth it. Might as well just do it the right way and then just from a lawyer, because I see people and I know people that they have actually done it online. They're working permits, they take it online. And they do it by themselves. Like their permanent residence or their working permit. They do it by themselves. So, it's actually interesting because I was like, well, I should have done it, but I feel like it was safer. I'll say….this one none of them work. I hate them. I hate I just hate him like, this is so hard.  So the CIC website - that's one of the main pages and it tells you everything… it gives you. Like, just like, it doesn't give you like an explanation of why you have to do this. I mean, it tells you the time and everything. But it tell them in their own way. Okay, you have to wait this period, this time. But its like, Hey, can I know more? Like what do I have to do with that time? do I have to do anything else or what? So this was like no. My mom did did Facebook. There's like a community for latinos. They they talk about it or something like that. We didn't went through that. I don't think there's that much like online resources."
Da,"	Unfortunately I dont agree with any of the immigration policies that they have in this country or any where. So it might sound really bad but I think they're not fair…. they're not fair with how they select people and then how they accept people and unfortunately like we live in the world like a lot of people they have to leave their country not because of that’s what they want but because they don’t have another choice because their home it's been bombed or their home is being ….they're being threatened…. their kids are being threatened. And I understand that. I completely understand that. I mean, I think…I think that…for instance, I do not agree about the refugee stand for the Syria. Okay so the reason why is because the way they treat other people way better than us.. the actual immigrants, right? Basically, what the government is trying to make me understand is like so if youre actually having all this trouble and everything will give you everything. They give him the housing, they give them clothes, they give them all these resources to help them out to go through this life in Canada. Whereas the other parts ….where ‘us’ when I go into this category – Its like “no we don’t care, you need to pay and you have to figure out a way”. So, like in my my case, and a lot of people that I know… it's just not… I don't have nothing against their country or anything. It's everything like that…they can have everything so easy in the silver plate, but they don't realize how fortunate they are. is not the fact I understand completely. It's not a fact, I completely agree. They should actually give more help to them. And we should support. It doesn't make sense that you're helping all these other people and then just forget about the people that actually are contributing to your economy and are giving you money for that and we're not using any taxpayers money, or any we're not using any money or resources from any of the government. And at the end of the day, they really treat us like, like, “Okay, thank you. Thank you for coming”, you know. I even even see skilled workers, all the things that they have to go through, all the money that they have to pay. My friends, I’ve seen them - the scare of actually going back to your country because you don't actually perform in this country because they will you know, they see no, you can stay here because you don't qualify for it. I'm like, I'm thinking to myself like it is… like, how I'm not qualifying for it?, Like explain to me, how im not ‘qualifying’ for having to live in this country? I pay my taxes. I've been here for a long time and being a contributor for this society. I think and being part of here. I mean, it's not fair that you give priority to other people, just because your government and the choice of the people decided to do that. This is not even their fault. I'm not saying it's their fault. There's nothing to do with that. I mean, a lot of people they might thim im really.. a lot of people might not like my way of viewing things but its just like…its not fair to the person that he has worked so hard and then people like that the people like this… they going through that situation as a refugee, they don't appreciate what they really have. Sometimes its stupid… sometimes people like, they think they deserve everything in a way that and they show it to us like no I just. I'm not gonna work. I already have this. I have that… and I'm like that must be nice. I mean, like the refugees… they got greeted by the Prime Minister,they gave them clothes and everything - I didn't get anything. I didn't get any clothes. I have to buy my own. I didn't get any money. I have to actually pay taxes. I didn't receive any money back. I earned a lot of money for the government, just because I was working two jobs. Which makes no sense. I was like, in makes really no sense. Like how the government is actually doing this. Like, so what are you saying? Like, okay, so you have to work so hard to be in this country. You need to pay your lawyer. You need to pay your housing. Rent is not cheap here. You need to pay for your food. You need to pay for your normal expenses. And if it's something left to have a little bit treat for yourself, then you can have it. But then you see other people that they use the system. And I’ve seen it for long and I'm not saying it's only Syrian people. A lot of South American people do the same thing. And it's just so frustrating and its so, so like, like, it's just it makes me so mad. Because it's like, you have no idea what you have. Like they're giving you the opportunity, take it. Not everyone gets that opportunity. And that's what a lot of people don't understand. You know how many people actually want to be in a place where people are actually suffering back in their own back in their country, who are actually having a struggle. And then they come here, and they don't do anything. That makes me mad, because, at least at least in here, and what I have to say for myself is like, this space haven't been, it wasn't easy. At least I'm proud to say like, you know what, I'm a Mexican. And I came here to actually do something with my life and I actually work and I contribute to the economy. I am proud to be in this community and whoever told the opposite, that would be like no.. I do the same things as you. Because I see it with my partner. He's Canadian. So he has that conservative mentality that immigrants take everything.  Well, my ex partner… we just recently broke up. It's just because most of the people they say the same things. The same old comments that immigrants are taking their jobs or taking their, their opportunities, they're taking their money. And I'm like thinking like, No, that's not true. Like, the only reason why I had the job in the bank because Canadians don’t want that job. I mean that job is there.. I mean, we're the same.. I don't have enough experience. What is the difference between me and other Canadian? We have the same thing."
Da,"	So I did have a boyfriend back in Mexico, I did had to break up with him. I did lost a lot of things. I literally lost my lost friendships, I lost my home, I lost my family. I lost a lot of things to just to come to this country, to work hard and do a lot of these things. I think, I found this opportunity that you gave me to actually tell my story and I'm thankful for that. Because its just sometimes people the people they just need to know. I think sometimes …people they just live in a mind state that nothing is happening…"
Da,"	I will go somewhere in Europe. I will not stay here.  I mean, after what I've gone through, I mean, this is just sad. Sometimes. You know what I mean? I mean, I love this country. Don't get me wrong. I think it's a great opportunity. And actually, they deserve to be here, and they actually want to have people there. Because it's not… like I like I keep saying it's not fair. And they give opportunity to other people that they should not be here. For instance, they should not take everyone.. you know what I mean? I think it and it's not about their background is not about their religion, it's not about anything. It's like they if you don't want to be part of this community are you doing here? If you don't want to get used to this culture, you don't want to be part of this culture. What are you doing here because culture is one of the main things and one of the main things that my mom and her ex-husband told me is like, you’re coming here, you change your culture. You're not Mexican, you're not. You're a Canadian. You're not celebrating any Mexican culture. You're not going to celebrate anything like that because you're in Canada. You're not in Mexico. And you know what? I agree. I say, You know what - you're right. If you come to my country, I will say the same thing, because you're in my country, you come here. And of course, I don't wanna, if im in Mexico, I don’t wanna celebrate Canadian holidays, right? It makes sense. I was like, Yeah, but unfortunately, a lot of people they don't like… they don't get that. They want to change the culture here. Which I don't agree with it because it's not.. Like why am I making this culture to change? What am I giving to this culture to telling you know why you need to celebrate my Mexican holidays? But just because of politically being correct, they have to do all these things. Right."
Da,"	I would go to France. My dream was to be in Spain but Spain is not doing great right now. I mean, right now I'm going to my permanent residence. I do want to do something different. I keep telling my mom the same thing and she told me just get your citizenship and go because it's easier. Right?. I want to at least a place to say that is home."
Da,"	So here.. the humanitarian process. I just want to tell you what they actually asked. So, they asked you for letters from Canadian people for comments. This opened my eyes for some people. A lot of people they helped me with this and it's people that they're my clients people that they’re still my clients. I think I got maybe…. they don't give you an estimate of how much you need to help…. but the lawyer says that the many you get the better right because them…. for the government it says like you were part of the community and then they know you. They know you. And I got so many beautiful letters from people that I just met …just one day and I asked for a letter and they say yes, like So nice people like I mean, and they're all from here, from Cabbagetown. I mean, a lot of people they say they say, it might sound stupid, maybe because it's just a letter. But it just opens your eyes. Right? Like, I mean, I'll show you one it's, it's, it's just beautiful. How people are. I just love… I love that's the whole reason why I love customer service because this is it gives you a better understanding of people. Right? So this is one of my my clients from the butcher shop. I just talked to… She's so nice, and she gave me this amazing letter. And it's just beautiful. How actually people express about you just by knowing you for a little while. I love it. I have more. They did handwritten letters too. It's just beautiful. How many people they actually open their, their way and they see something because that's what they told me is like, you know what, I see something for me, and then I see that you are going to be great in this country and then you deserve to be in this country. I'm like, thank you. So they asked you for banking statements. So for the humanitarian base, they asked me for the all your banking statements so basically all your banking history….you have you had a credit card, and your personal banking because you need to prove how you been paid. How you pay your credit cards. How many loans you have, taxes – that’s the most important thing. How do you pay your taxes? and it has to be every year so every year, But I will put you in there like this is the most important thing for me was the letters. Yeah, letters, I think. I think it opens the eyes. It makes the officer making the application makes understanding of who you are, right. I got letters from restaurants or letters from people, we got letters from from …from my My brother's bosses. I go letters from my bosses and hearing the bank to say yes for sure I'll write a letter for you. I don't mind. Its so nice right? I can't I just can't believe I went through that was just like it is it is a hard process. Like sometimes I like I told you right in the beginning, like I feel like if I would have stayed in Mexico, like I told you, if I would have known all of this, I wouldn’t have come.  I'm not gonna say this. I think it's like all the experience that I have in here and made me learn a lot of things. I think I'm more mature and a lot of things. I got a good job. I got a lot of people that help me support me and then being together with me how I got closer with my family even closer with my mom and closer with my brother. It feels great. I mean, I don't think I would have done this things in Mexico. I think it would have been different. I would have been in school right now. I think I would have done just the same just because I wanted to Mexico. When I was talking with my friends in Mexico, what have they done and everything. And theyre still in University, right, they starting and everything I'm like, I would love to actually be in there. You know, I wouldn't love to just feel that. I feel like when I came here in this country, make me to Miss A lot of things like school .. who doesn't want to go to university? Who doesn't want to interact with people your age, to have the same thinking to actually, like express different ideas with each other? Right? So I think I missed that I miss and I would have loved to have that opportunity to actually interact with people who are my around my age. And it's hard You know what I mean? When you see it when you see people that they go to universities, like, when I go to university, I'm gonna be old, people are gonna be younger. "
Su,"	So I was born in Islamabad. So my dad was a diplomat. After every two foreign postings he would have to come back to Islamabad to work at the Foreign Office. I was in Islamabad. When I was 2 I moved to Baghdad for about five years in Iraq and then then I moved to Indonesia for about three years. Then back to Islamabad when I was about seven, eight, and I went to school in Islamabad so this is my first sort of thing with with Pakistan. But Islamabad is very different culturally from Pakistan, from Karachi because there's a lot of foreign population like theres diplomats and stuff. So you don't really feel the typical-ness. You know, it's not claustrophobic, it's, it's a little more broad. And then after Pakistan, we moved to the Netherlands for about six years. I think that was my dad's longest posting and that was kind of like, has in a way become home for all of us in some way or the other and then after the Netherlands, I moved to Russia. So I was living in Moscow for about three years. My dad retired some time in February 2008. I was still in the middle of high school, I was doing my International Baccalaureate, and then so I obviously could not it was like, couple of months ago, my final exams I was seeking move back to Pakistan with them. So I stayed on in Russia all alone. And that was a lot of fun. But apart from that, like I learned about, like, what the Russian culture and about so many things and about just just how like, you know, and I remember ever since I was like, you know, 10- 11 I would just go on and on about Pakistan to my friends and how amazing the culture is I was just one of those like, you know, it's very proud of all of these things and, and people just like my wedding happened in December, and all my friends were like you've been raving about Pakistan for like, as long as we've known you. Like, we're so excited to come. They all, well, some of them came and, like, you know, it was nice. So, then I moved to London to do my law at UCL and then I thought I didn't want to do my bar, whatever I came back to Pakistan. And yeah the story starts from there in terms of work and then finding like, what I'm good at what I what my passions are, like, you know, all that kind of stuff. And it was very difficult sort of moving a step forward, because they're like, but your lawyer, why wouldnt you want to practice law? Why would you want to do this? Why would you want to do that? So So we actually did, like a couple of friends. We actually close… but honestly when I practice law, my my impetus was not to become like a corporate lawyer or like whatever you see in suits or whatever and all of that stuff and makes shit loads of money. It was…it was more like, I wanna work. So criminal law I want to do Human Rights, that's where I was heading towards. And both things in Pakistan are a challenge because a woman being a criminal lawyer, anyone being a criminal lawyer and most of the criminals are very sort of notorious. And you know, I started I remember I started visiting kurachi Central Jail quite a few times to get an idea to get people's stories because I liked writing also, I like writing also, and I remember getting calls and getting tracked and all of that kind of stuff. So that was, you know, just a little uncomfortable. So basically that happened then and then we like couple of our friends were like very passionate and stuff. We, together with the guidance of Asma Jahangir, she's she's a very well known like activist add lawyer in Pakistan. So we started this legal aid clinic, whereby we would work with people who could not afford Legal Assistance which is 70% of the population. So you know if there was like land crimes and you know people taking over their property or people taking the land or people taking over whatever… like whatever is domestic violence or domestic divorce, the husband not giving the divorce, whatever it was, we were kind of solving it and than unfortunately I got a job into another good corporation which was linked law remotely and so I said okay, why not? But I kept in touch with the legal aid clinic and I believe it's doing really well right now. It's it's like when we started we were like, like working from like, what like, basically just like someone was kind enough to give a room from their house, like, somewhere in Lyari, right which is a very…was a criminal infested area. But then, now I believe it has its own office and all of that stuff so it is picking up. I would love to do that kind of thing in Pakistan but unfortunately like, you know, there's implications to that. Yeah as there is anything that's a little out of, you know, boundaries or whatever. And there are a lot of boundaries. "
Su,"	So I have met my husband about three years ago at like, so we knew each other through a lot of mutual friends but we never really like met and spoke. But then like a friend of mine, and friend of his suggested that we…like we should probably like, get to know each other and it was a mutual friend of ours whose wedding it was. And so, he introduced us and then you know, one thing led to another we started sort of like, this is December 2015. And he was only there in Pakistan for a holiday and I don't know what happened to me but I just took… I'm very careful about these things but I just took a leap of faith and then we started having a long distance relationship. I told him that like, the only the only way I'm gonna have a long distance relationship with you is if we make an effort to meet after three, four months whether that's, you know, Im not asking you to come all the way to Pakistan or I'm not going to come all the way to Canada but lets meet half way. Otherwise not going to work on the phone and all that stuff. So we try to make an effort to that consistently as possible. Year and a half into it, he wanted me my family. I met his and then from then on. We kind of like, sort of… Oh, we met like in our first holiday was in Lisbon that we went to Miami. We went to Barcelona, so, and he came to … he comes to Karachi every December. So that, and then San Francisco. So like just random places, right? That was one of the things I put in my head was like, Im not gonna go into this blind sighted, you know.  "
Su,"	To be honest, I didn't want I don't think Pakistan was even an option because I don't think they sort of sort of did the kind of law that I wanted to do. I think I was just kind of following the footsteps of my brother by going to school in London. But in hindsight, I probably had a better option going North America, or Canada do my law, but I believe it was I just wanted to get it done. I was not a very studious student in any case, so I was sort of like, okay, so we get it done three years done. With America, like or whatever you'd have to do like pre law then. You know, but like being in America would have definitely been a more wholesome experience. Yeah, but but London is fabulous. Great place. You know, at the time, it's funny because right now, couple weeks ago, I read that they changed the law… and the students who graduate from… foreigners who graduate from English universities have a 2 year to find work and whatever. At that time we didn't have that. And with Law, it was a very, like Oxford, Cambridge, very strict, aristocratic, sort of, selection process where the top law firms had people were graduates from there. And obviously people who are not of my racial ethnicity, if you could say that, so that was very competitive. And that's why I came home. "
Su,"	Umm not too bad, actually. Okay, not too bad, because they, they're very, they're a lot more good with handing out these jobs to people who have like, would have had like a diverse sort of background and cultural, whatever, you know, ethnicity, as opposed to giving them to people who are from here. I don't know why that is but that's probably a good a good thing I guess? I don't know, or maybe people over here just more into like finance and marketing. And that's what I tend to sort of hear every time. So when someone says I have a job, they're like, Oh, well I work for a bank for we work for, you know, whatever a company like Lowe's or you know, retail and that kind of stuff. So maybe that job market isnt built or maybe it'll be funny that way. But it hasn't been like hugely competitive to get a couple of interviews here and there. Like, yes, with the bigger places for sure. But the smaller ones, you get something or the other. "
Su,"	What I'd say married life is Probably like..So I came in and obviously there's like a lot of expectations you have when you move in with someone that you're dating. And but it gets a lot of a lot different couple of months, well people say a couple of years down the line. In our case couple of months down the line. There were a lot of his travels, a lot of like challenges in terms of us getting along as people because we realized we're complete opposite in work like, you know, for fun, but then when it came to practicality, it was like, okay, clash, clash. So obviously one or the other person, or both the take step back in their personalities. But it's been, like it's been challenging.. ill tell you what, its been challenging and we don't share the same interests at all. Obviously, he's been in Canada for what 15 years. For me, I'm new so like every time, you know. So like every time I'm like I get excited about like, you know, going to Kensington Market or sitting on the patios like having lunch, and drinks and whatever during the summer or whatever. He's just like, yeah I've been there done that. And that's sort of like, you know, you’re kind of boring, like, but sometimes he'll he'll understand that like, okay, she just moved. But it really helps the fact that I've got like, some way or the other, a lot of my childhood friends ended up living here. So I do have like, a good like a good number of friends and close ones. I'd be like meeting someone or the other something, you know, you know, I'm not like.. And as far as him moving away, like my mother in law comes and visits in the summer. So she's here these days, and she's like, if you want to come and stay with… She lives with their daughter, her daughter’s not married, so she's like, if you want to come and stay or whatever. I'm like, you know, to be honest, like, I'm okay. Like, on my own. I actually like it, like, you know, and I don't get lonely or whatever, like that kind of thing. I mean, yeah, you know, I'm just I'm one of those like, I just do my own thing. "
Su,"	I'm actually good. Oh, yeah. So for the visitor visa, the first time I applied for it I got rejected because to be honest, it was a very rushed and most people do apparently from Pakistan. This is the hardest visa, the Canadian visa is the hardest to get. So and to be honest, to be fair, I didn't really put in a lot of documents. I didn't really apply from my heart. So I just sort of gave it in and I got rejected. This time around, like there was a lot of documents and stuff and like a lot of because this meant a lot more or more stakes involved. At that point. I was just going to meet my boyfriend. And then I was this time I was like, you know, I need a visa visa in order for me to get into the country after we get married, right. So the process itself didn't take very long I believed like I got an email maybe like 15 days down the line saying come pick up your passport, but the whole collection of documents and justifying things took a bit longer than that. Yeah, any other visa would say you would see how long isn't like a few months? maybe, you know, I'd say like was, I'd say a month and a half. Yeah, okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, A lot of people like, like my husband's cousin, he applied, he has a Pakistani passport as well. So he applied from Dubai, like within five days he got it. From Pakistan, I don't know why they're just a little more stricter."
Su,"	His family, I would say are very traditional but Modern Family. So he is not he's traditional in the sense like, now, that I'm living with him I get to know how traditional he is. But he's not like every time like say for example if you go out for dinner with a couple of people and they're not they're from Canada or whatever and someone asks how’s Pakistan and I'd be like Pakistan’s great like there's so much…you go up north, there mountains… you go south theres the sea. And he… hes just like Pakistan’s shit, like, wow that's one thing we clash on. Im like Amir, look like we have so many like there's so much culture like you know whether it comes to food or comes to traditions or folklore or whatever. He's not very proud Paksitani.  In the sense of gender roles and stuff, he's very typical but when it comes down to,"
Su,"	Im very artsy, so I'm gonna try and do something artsy. I think I'm more in the moment kind of person. So that’s a Pakistani flag. So it says 20th December 1989 the day this is the day I was born. I was born and this is the day that my dad was he was going through a lot of politics in terms of people and his colleagues. So he was fighting for a promotion that he was very much due for. But this day, the day of my birth, I was born as finally when he got that promotion, making him like the ambassador, like in foreign countries. So he always sees my birth as good luck. I've always been like a little spoiled dads child. So moving on from that, like if I were to go on…I wish I knew what the Arab flag looked like. This is Iraq. This is Indonesia. So my first best friend was I met… was in Indonesia. So then, leaving was sad obviously. Then we went to Islamabad which was interesting. So, we stayed like random places. Well, when my dad was doing a course and we stayed in one of those houses too long…Like, our like, container came by a container came from from Jakarta. And then we bought a house and my dad was busy like doing these courses and my mom us were like, just. like first experience in Pakistan like, our maid, like goes missing and my mom was like, but I dropped her home, like last night and she told me this is the house and like the next day the family comes to the house and they're like, like what did you do to like my daughter? She's not back home, whatever and they threatened to put it up in the newspaper or whatever. Turns out the girl herself had ran away with another guy. So that was like, obviously all this visa stuff was supported by my dad. So I don’t really know much about it. So there was this holiday without mom. It was amazing. No with dad was amazing. Yeah, mom was …all these rules back then obviously right. I remember the flag. So That's Holland, that's like legal.. like that’s weed, so Canada. Yeah its way more legal here than in Holland. There you can't smoke on the streets. Over here, like there's no, like you can order it online on the Government of Ontario Canada website…like they even have like CBD oils and stuff like that which you can tell me which which ones are good so. To be honest I'm not like so much as so much a weed person I realized so yeah i think i think i think… or maybe the strains that I've like ordered haven't been like very suitable for me but like in Pakistan whatever I used to get like cuz I love writing so get me very creative. Over here, it just gets me very like paranoid and jittery and I don't like that.  So, well I was a little upset and I think I spoke for all my family when I say this that like this is you know, home. We did there for so many years and moving from Holland to like, say like, you think about like Russia, you're like, what the hell… Where am I going? But then you know, we get there and like, you know, It's amazing. Like it's just the best. I speak Dutch but now that's going down the drain obviously because I have less people to practice with but. Im trying to draw this but its not working…St. Basil's Cathedral basically. Yeah. And the Kremlin, but I'm not I can't draw them. And then funnily enough their flag is the opposite of…So all of this was like diplomatic visa. My father retired in 2008. I'm not gonna go into the English flag cuz, yeah, England..whatever. I was living in London. It was nice. I had a lot of friends at that point who had also moved to London. So it's kind of like interesting because you know, I had a community. Its like those weighs – like justice or whatever. So this is the artist that I work with. Obviously, she doesn't look like that. But just to signify that I was curating in some point in my life. So I got a very serious or, I thought was a serious relationship in my second year like while I was in Pakistan, got my heart broken. I thought it was the end of the world but it clearly wasn't. There are many more heartbreaks after that and many more like fun times. And then we have in the middle, I think, the most important one. Like I know that’s not a maple leaf but like, Ironic, right, because I was born on 28th December. I got married on the 23rd of December. So [moving to Canada], It was a struggle. The weather was a struggle, there was loss of relationship excitement, like I said, husband traveling a lot, not ready to let go of his bachelor lifestyle habits. Now it's gone better because lot of people told him to but initially No. And then I used to be stuck in upset because I but now I found my own thing and I found my way to go through with him and how to deal with him. I know what he's tired when he wants to watch a match, when he does these things I know like the whole rhythm. So I'm not very like pushed about it. But yeah, that's, that's well, that's my very basic map, I guess. "
Su,"	It's stressful? Yeah, very stressful. Like, I can't wait to reach to the mark where, like, you know, I'm on my own kind of thing and like, it's not dependent, like, in any way, like, you know, it's a very insecure time, you know, like your dependence is completely on somebody else. Financially also, and as well as, you know, country wise or living wise. That's never ever happened with me. So, I think that that is a that's a tough like. These are tough emotions to juggle sometimes. I've always been this kind of like independent person and then you turn around you suddenly become utterly dependent on someone else. Its like ha ha, joke's on you, kind of thing. Well, I think the first few months like you were kind of like, okay, let's just go with however it is. Yeah, he was a bachelor. So he was like, Okay, we'll buy groceries whenever and neither was really cared. But because I was like, I was so used to a house that was systematic and he was so used to living as a bachelor, that I wanted systems like groceries every two weeks, I wanted to cook coz I like cooking like, I wanna have meals ready, and like stuff like that. So, those are the things I had to like systemize and then obviously, like, anything I needed to get or whatever, like, although, like I try very hard to like pull out my savings or whatever and do part time jobs here and there. Obviously he still supports like, like, anything that I need, right? Like, you know, like give me a certain amount of whatever it is so that I can buy this or that.. So even though like I would not be on this way, I wouldn't be on the street anyway. But like, it's just one of those things where you're like, I'd rather know when this is happening and when it's going to be fine, like, as opposed to be like in the dark because I don't like uncertainty. That’s it. And it's also, I’ll tell you what, I've never lived in a country as an immigrant. I've always lived and my dad used to always say this, and Im like dad “That's such a wrong thing to say”… like don't use the word “immigrant” in the negative connotation, but he's like, I'm right. You realize that when you move there, that in your life you did have like a privileged status, whether you liked it or not, and then in Pakistan you lived at home. Now suddenly, you're basically like, gonna be a barista at Starbucks, you're gonna have problems getting your mind down, right? Rather than thinking I'm still living in that sphere of mind. For me. That's, that was the biggest challenge to overcome. And I think I've overcome that really, but like it's still every day, it's like, okay, you're not starting from if you were at level 10 in Pakistan, you're not starting from level 10, you probably started with level two. Yeah. And that is sort of, it hits your self esteem, it hits your dynamics with your husband or whatever, because, you know, like, it just does, like, even indirectly, its got nothing to do with anyone else. But it's just like that. And I have been financially like, I lived with my parents, whatever. So as far as like bills and stuff goes, I had like no idea… but in terms of like my own financial stuff, like things I wanted to buy or the things I wanted to do, I never asked my parents. So it's it's challenging because I've been like, not that I have to ask my husband for money. He will just like transfer it every month or whatever but, but you know getting there it takes time to get there because it's awkward. You're like, he's my boyfriend you're dating, everything's fun suddenly it comes down to money. And then when I researched it was like, a big like a big issue between couples and I was like, okay, there's the other issue I remember we were joking about this when we were dating was like two two big issues in a marriage. And then one is cleanliness and I remember dating sitting there laughing and saying what do you mean cleanliness? How is that even an issue that leads to divorce or whatever. And and he was like, I don't know, I'm just reading this off a website and the second one is budgeting. And I was like oh Don't worry, we won't have issue with either but like I here now and I have issues with both [laughs]. My husbands not the most cleanest person… he's clean but he's messy. Yeah, he's hygienic. You know, he's he's like, Okay throw the shoes here, the socks here.  And the the thing is it's so funny because I was living at home I didn't really care like I kept my room like clean or whatever but like I wouldn't have cared if someone came to my house and put their boots here or there but now I'm just like “tomorrow I'm gonna wake up I know I have to do it”. So like it just gets me antsy and irritated. And obviously factors like that wouldn't be there if I was like working safe say, if I work from like nine to like six seven, I wouldn’t give a shit about like what's happening like…That's also one of the things I that's why I want to get to work so fast although could take a longer sabbatical, and do part time gigs, but I think one of the reasons for mental stability will also be getting back to work. An idle mind is the devil's workshop this basically it. "
Su,"	Mostly like brand ambassadors stuff. So right now working for this thing called, there's a magazine called refinery 29. But we know it like they're they're doing these pop ups all over this a fourth year doing these art installations. What it is, is like an experience-based thing. So like they're curating 29 rooms with different experiences for people go there. So, there's like artists, they've been doing this in Florida, Atlanta, and like, a couple of places, and this is the first time they doing in Toronto at the exhibition place. So they’ve picked all Canadian local artists, and they're doing like very like performance art. And it's very interactive. So if you're like a visitor and you bought a ticket, you're not just standing here looking at the museum, but you're interacting with the Art. And so I'm just like, working.. I don't know exactly what my role is till the training is tomorrow, but I'm gonna be like one of their brand ambassadors. Probably make contacts and stuff during that time. But, yeah, it's like 12 hours a day work, but I think I need that. Like, honestly networking, you know, it's like, it's weird because it's not difficult. It's actually one of the easier countries to network. But I just feel like because of the closeted environment that we actually experienced in Paksitan where a girl goes up to a guy like gives out like a visitor cards, like “oh, okay, you know”, so that I think that's kind of been drilled into our like, my system. So like, the whole networking thing is like, like my parents. They’re like “what's networking?...just like send CV’s” Im like dad these guys like networking… it is 80% of the job. The other day I went to this NGOs random like annual general meeting and my husband was like why are you going to the annual general meeting? so random…I was like I'm going to go and try making contacts. After the meeting was done I walked up the CEO and I'm like, Look, I like to introduce myself very briefly coz she obviously didn’t have time. She's like, Look, let me just give you my card and email me and we'll see what positions we have and where we can put you for that was like, you know, like a step to get out. But I think most of the time I'm so stuck in my comfort zone. It's a lot of laziness and like it's, kind of like futility and actions like… Okay, so what if I get this I'm never gonna be as senior as big as I was in Pakistan. So like, I'm gonna have to work what 10 years more to get the level that I was in Pakistan. Its ridiculous. Even though that may not be the truth. But I don't you know, that's what I mean. That self defeating thought kind of puts me back on doing stuff. "
Su,"	For sure. I really want to work with immigrants and refugees. My dream was actually to like move to…. before I met Amir, My dream was to like move to Europe and work with refugees and sort of work in in terms of policy making for assimilation for refugees or refugees or immigrants because I think that is….and honestly in Toronto as well people say oh community centres, YMCA, employment Canada blah, blah, blah. But honestly, that doesn't help very much. It's not about Okay, I want to come and get a job immediately. It's just about like, if, if I've just flown in or whatever, from Tunisia or wherever, I didn't speak a word of English and whatever, like, how can you help me in the immediate level to get me assimilated to my culture, to make sure that I live in a place which has people from my culture, like I've always been interested in, like, migration and like, settlement and, and immigration and just general sort of like, you know, cultural assimilation, and I feel there's a big lacking of that, no matter how many centers they have. "
Su,"	like WhatsApp, Facetime – that kinda stuff. "
Su,"	Well, to be honest, like, I'm not very profit driven in the sense that I'm not like, I'm a little hippie at heart. So, I would say, my husband the complete opposite He's like, now we've got an apartment. We have a house. Now we have to buy this know we have to buy that, and it's always about that. I'm just like, just relax and enjoy the moment. Like, I'm not I'm not worried if I don't have a house. Kids are not my agenda anytime soon. But I'd like to have then for sure.  Yeah, I think I think right now what I'm working on a lot is personal growth. Yeah, like emotional regulation, and you know, stuff that there's a very interesting therapy procedure called dialectical behavioural therapy. And there's a lot of workbooks available for that. And I think I'm working on that I'm working on just, I am inherently a very sensitive person. So I'm working on just sort of growing a thicker skin and just kind of like accepting situations as they are. And I think the self loathe, unless I know do that, I cant be good enough for anything or anyone. Whether that's a job or relationship or kids or so have you whatever. So the focus I tried, I'm trying to go and it's very difficult because I'm not a every time I tried the focus to go on me, I keep thinking I'm a selfish person. I should be doing stuff for other people because that's how I am. But I've just sort of pushed myself said no, no, unless you cant do stuff for yourself, you can’t pour from an empty kart. "
Me,"	Yes – he was visiting me all the time? Yeah. Visiting every month. Every month he was visiting me. We dated for at least I think a year. year and a half. Yeah. Desi dating – aunty uncle dating. Laughs. So he used to come. A mutual friend introduced, okay. She knew him. And she told me about him. So she was like... she said he lives in Canada, and you know, he has a similar situation as mine again, he was divorced also. Love marriage and then got divorced. He have three older kids again, and then. And I have two older kids and I was divorced also so but I was like, it's not gonna work. You know, he lives in Canada, and it was a love marriage and then divorce and here, so, friends were more like, no, he should talk to him. So I was like Okay. So I talked to him, and we clicked. We clicked on our first conversation, After that I was a mom that never texted. And suddenly I was texting him. I was texting, like 100 messages a day. Yeah, we just clicked. You know, it was the same jokes and we had the same situation with our divorce. He had a hard divorce and I had a very hard divorce. Kids were depending on me, my kids were on me, his kids were on him. So then that, we understand that, we had the similar stories. Yeah. So basically that and then, yeah, with him, I laughed more. I was myself. You know, usually I didn't know if I could talk to anyone. I didn't know what to talk, you know. Because we're so sheltered. with him. I was more of myself. And so we, so he used to come every month. His company in US. He lives in Montreal. So he visits his company in Chicago every month.  And then from there, he would come and see me. Yes, he have stories like, you know, the plane that he travelled and you know, on those small seats and four hour flight and three hour flight, so yeah, he would come every month to see."
Me,"	When I moved here - 2016 – two of his kids were living with us. And they are older. His oldest son. He is 28 Yeah. Then he had a daughter was 24. Yeah. No, another son who's 24 and then a daughter was 25. Yeah, so our kids are kind of like the same. We have a new Brady Bunch. Desi Brady Bunch. So two of them were living with us, his oldest son and his daughter was living with us at that time. They just moved out this year."
Me,"	Yeah. lives with me. And so for him, it would it was hard for him to move there. Because..because of the healthcare. His sister lives here, but she wouldn't have able to take care of them by herself. So, I moved here left my job. I was working for 22 years. Yeah. And yeah. So that was understood that he wouldn’t move.  And how was that for your family like your children as well or your other family that you were deciding to move? What role did they have to play that this.. Yeah, it was. It was very interesting. My kids, even though they are older, and they were the one who pushed me to get married because they moved out. You know I was living on my own and the cat, and you know us didn't have every time tornado or hurricane come you know they are more worried about me so they were pushing me “No mom you need to get married and it was funny because I would say between all three of us Let's see who will get married first” laughs. It would be like you know somebody would say, you know, you should think about yourself you know your kids will find somebody but you need to think about it then I was thinking okay, you know, I need to find people and you know that butterflies was in my head and then somebody will say “no, no, you don't think about you… think about your daughter. She needs to get married.” So in my head I was like I am an older person I need to think about my daughter. But my kids were very much supportive. They love Ijhtaba. My daughter talks to him about, about any mashwara [advice] and everything, you know, even though they were both were fine, but yeah, it was hard for them. It was hard for them. And I'm finding out now that my daughter when I was married, and I was moving, I was selling my stuff. She just... she was working at the time, but she started acting up. Yeah, she would not let me hug her.  Like she was angry all the time. Because, you know, it was her house and now she doesn't have a house there. Yeah, I'm, I'm the house and I'm not there. So at that point, I was realizing but I was planning to move here. I and I was going through my own emotions. When I was getting married. I didn't think I didn't sleep for like three months. You know because I'm Leaving my job and I'm leaving my house… So she got into that and, and for months, she would not let me hug her. She just closed in. And I didn't know what to do because I was moving and then when I was moving, she left her job and she went to Europe for three months. Backpacking. I was kind of worried but then she is very strong headed and she has a good head on her shoulders. I trust her completely you know. But there was so much going on.. so many pieces were moving that I couldn't even you know, focus on one thing, but she left for three months. She quit her job. And between that time I moved to Montreal. She came back to Montreal to me. And then she was just depressed. She didn't have a job, she spent her savings and it was and this is not her house, and before I was completely hers, but now I have a husband. You know, so he needs as much attention as she does. And so she would not get out of the bed and then after literally yell and say, you know, you need to do something. And I know she wanted to stay here with me, but she couldn't because she couldn’t work. She doesn't have her health care. She was getting depressed and depressed, and depressed. It was very hard. It was very hard. And his kids were, even though they were older, but the other piece was with me that I'm here in their house. Its not my house. So the next morning when I moved here, I was like, I sit on the sofa and I'm like, Okay, now what do I do? I feel like I'm a guest, because this is not my house. But what do I do now? You know, things were not in right places, you know because they were just living. So it's just like, but I couldn't change things like this because I have to still feel that it's their house. I am the one who's coming from outside and then my daughter came and she's depressed. And so, yeah, I mean, it took about a couple of months for her to just move. She went back to Jami in Chicago. They both start fighting because it was just a roommate situation, you know, they she, she was just not…she became a little difficult and as well Jami became difficult and I was in the middle and I got this new house going on…New family, but then she found a job so she was okay. And then I recently found out that Jami was not Okay. He felt like I had abandoned him. So… and I just found out recently…he's seeking therapy. Naz is also seeking therapy and they want me to go for therapy also. Theyre like mom, it's really good because you gotta go you know, get your issues out because when the things happen I was always taking care of them, you know like the divorce. And instead of having time for my depressio. I was taking care of them. So they both are fine now. But in our therapy is they tell them to you have to go and confront people…tell them what's not right with you. So he did, he confronted me. (laughs) and, and I could you know, it was a time when he felt that I was not there, but I was there but he was so depressed that he didn't see me in the house and I was so depressed that I didn’t see him in the house when we were going through the divorce. And he, he told me that, you know, he felt like I abandoned him, but I was like, No I didn't abandon you. We were just too depressed to see each other. He's okay. But we figured out Naz was always the one who would scream. “I want this… why you're not looking at me.” You know?. And Jamal was always quiet. So, he bottled up, and I was thinking he's okay, we have to handle Naz. She's the crazy one. But apparently, she's not the crazy one. We all know we were the crazy ones, we were bottling up everything but anyway. So yeah, it was. It was amazing journey. So he's okay now because he just let it out. And I'm glad that he did that because if he didn't tell me what was bothering you him about me, then I would not know this all my life and I didn't know. I would not know why he's upset. Yeah, at least now he give me a chance to explain myself to say, you know, this is what happened to me, you know? "
Me,"	Yeah, they are in touch with their dad but they try not to. So it's, it's hard for them because he he is very difficult person that he doesn't think about other person. He keeps telling Naz that she needs to get married because she's getting old. Shes 28…And nobody will marry her. And, you know, she's losing her. You know, her time to get married. So you will find people, kids, boys, that just want a Green Card and just want to to move here. So he would tell them no see, your time is going you will never get married because you're old, you’re getting too old.  So they don't talk to him. They don't need this.. They still call him to ask him how he's doing. He had two bypasses. He almost was going away and then we came back. He's going very strong now so so yeah. You know, they don't talk to him like Jami had confronted me. He did not confront his dad. you know, and I'm fine. So I think that he took twice on me because he couldn't, you know, yeah, the other part. So, which is okay, you know, but he would get worried about his dad if you hear tornados coming or hurricane came. Yeah. And he would be like, Oh, I have to talk to pap, you know, see how he's doing. So the connection is still there."
Me,"	Yeah. Yeah, I have my mom and dad both. My mom is a US citizen. Oh, great. Okay. My dad is not because he has remarried. So he have two wives. We are from the older wife, not older – the first one. So he, my mom is with him now because he had a stroke so he couldn’t move his body right. He can only move his hand and he cant walk. But his second wife with who he was all that time passed away oh so then then you know after he had a stroke my mom kind of went back to him."
Me,"	Oh my god long time ago I don't go to Pakistan that often I only been there twice. So the last time I think is was 2000. that's a long time ago a long time. Yeah, my father was, you know, fine that that time and my mom she comes and goes so see her more often. I haven't seen my dad yet and talk to him on the phone here and there."
Me,"	So in the US, I was working as a, I started my job as a pharmacy technician, I have a Pharmacy technician certificate and I have an associate degree. Just a general one, you know, I took some classes at a community college. So then I started working as a pharmacy technician and that was my first job ever, never worked before ever. And it was Baxter I was a pharmacy technician and then there we had pharmacist and technicians. And manager, and General Manager. And what happened that we had a FDA audit and it didn't go well, because the paperwork was not completed. You know, nobody was doing sign up and nobody was actually checking. They were just doing things. So we had a big fine with FDA and at that time they needed a person to see paperwork from outside eyes - not to be involved in the room or anybody. Before the drug goes to the patient. So I used to when I was a technician, in my break, I used to ask my manager to give me filing, you know, something that I do differently. And, I don't know, it's, it was just me. And then they thought about me, you know, so I interviewed for that position. It was a documentation clerk, and they hired me, and it was very interesting because one day I was with the pharmacist and the technician and I was working under the pharmacist, under their license. So they say yes, and then I start, you know, filling up drugs and this and that. The next day, I was a got this position. So I was sitting outside and checking their batch record, oh, telling them that I'm not producing this batch because you didn't sign for area clearance, or you didn't sign who performed it? And they would be like, no, because, you know, you know, they did it. They just forgot to send I'm like, I'm not signing this paperwork, because if I sign it, then it becomes my responsibility. And then like, No, you don't know and under white guys, you know, big guys, and I'm this Pakistani. Laughs. And I would cry and then the manager would literally yell at my head, you know, they would just go against me, you know, but I'm like, No, I can't you know, because this is my position. I can't release this batch and I would keep batch close to my, my desk and I'm like, No, I'm not. So yeah, I bumped a lot of heads and I we used to cry, because, you know, I wanted to do that, you know, I couldn't release it. And, and later on I mean, they they started and my manager was not actually in Houston, my manager was in Chicago. So it's not like somebody was protecting me. I had to protect myself. I had to be the guy. So then, yeah. Later on, they were all they understood, because when FDA comes in, they are not the one who's explaining. I'm right in front of them. Like I'm sitting with you. And I'm explaining to you why I signed this paperwork and why I think this batch was correct. So at that point, I realize that I can fight you know, I can be you know, I can put my foot down and I never knew I had that part. Anyway, because in Pakistan, my education was not that I did Inter. And since my, there were issues with my mother and father and my father got remarried and all that, and there were seven of us. somewhere we got forgotten, you know. So, you know, at that point, I was an authority, even though I was just pharmacy technician, but I was authority with the pharmacist because I can't rely, you know, it's up to me to release the batch. So I realized that part in me, and then they they got used to me. And then it was funny because I was not a manager, and the manager would come as a quality manager over me, but they would be so scared to get out of their office and knock on the door because they have to, you know, confront people. And I would be still the one who’s on the floor. But I felt that I felt that even though and I worked very hard, I worked two shifts, I worked there 10 hours, I would not get paid for 10 hours. But since I started the quality, it was my baby. So I was kind of like, you know, and the managers, they would just sit in their office and would not come by the manager would just sit and sleep in his chair because the light will go off on its own because this had motion detector on it. And he would be sleeping and I'm the one who's facing the pharmacist and the manager, the audits and everything. So at that point, I was working too many hours and since I was having issues at home with my husband, that was kind of my refuge. And I remember I bought books from library saying how to handle a difficult situation because I was facing that at work. And my husband, my ex would get mad. He thought I was trying to control him. So, you know, so I was dealing with that part, you know, and he got jealous of me because I was not having college degree. I was doing so good. And he was not doing that good. So I was kind of like, you know, in that situation. And then I mean, I did spend a lot of time at work. I did night shifts, I did morning shifts, so I would do two shifts at one time while I was going through my divorce also. And I know I neglected kids but that's the only thing I knew, you know. And I know my company used me a lot because they didn't pay me overtime. They were like go your supervisor you supposed to do that. But then I later much later on I realized that no, the other supervisors were getting overtime. I would spend weekends there. You know, I would just go there at night and make sure everything is okay. Yes, I'm Who's facing FDA and I know they used me and I know I did neglected my kids at that point but that was kind of my refugee, you know, refuge kind of thing that I was somebody there. So then, um, so I always wanted to, to do a business. I would always think okay if I… if I didn't have work, you know I would do a business and with 22 years of service, I had 401k plan I had stock I had a house. Financially, I was okay. My kids went to college… they both finished college because I was like you do whatever you want to do but just finish college because I knew I didn't have college I would work twice as much as the person. So thank God even though our situation was not great. But my both kids Finished college. And I think that was the motivation to get out of the house. So I had, I had management skills even though I didn't have a manager title, but I never had manager, So I was the one who's managing a lot of different personalities, you know, so and then so then when I moved here I was Yeah, I was thinking what am I gonna do? Okay. Part of me wants to just retire. you know, because I work 22 years. 22 years.Yeah, very hard job. Part of me just wanted to relax. You know, because I was always I used to I remember I used to walk. And I would never know how I made it to point a to point b because I used to walk fast. Yes, with the FDA. You know, you have to make copies you have to, you know, you have to be like this. And my mind, start moving very fast. So it took me a long time to calm my mind down because I'm it's always on. So now when I'm here so I do bring a lot of different skills. I never really realized that I have different skills I thought okay I'll get a job as a quality or in pharmacy or something. I came here and I wanted to relax the first year but the language was the main thing here that you have to have a French. I started taking French classes 2016 …completely boggle my mind because it was just like vern, grammar, and going back to the school and you have no idea what is the chair the teachers are talking is in French and I'm like, okay, explain to me this and they're explaining to me in French. I don't understand them. So it took a couple of months and then I took time off from that because I guess I don't need French, you know, because I'm in West Island. And then a friend of mine sent me this job posting at Simwa. Simwa is a government organization and they give French classes and job assessment for the immigrants in West Island. So she sent me this job posting that they are hiring recruiters to recruit students from, from South Asian community for French classes. So now, you know, I got this posting. So then I got into that job mode, you know.. I used to do interviews, I used to take interviews. So I'm like, okay, you know, so I did, went and did the interview. And they were saying that you don't know French. I'm like, well, you don't need French. Because the people who I'm talking to, they don't understand French. You're looking for somebody like me, just recently come and came and don't, you know, need to take French classes and I know why they are not taking French classes. So, you know, that's how I can connect with them. So they hired me, I did really good interview. I convinced them. I was like, okay, you know, I would tell them. If you have kids, and you don't know French, and your kids will know French, they will have secret language. Your daughter will talk on the phone in French and you have no idea where she's going and meeting. They hired me on the spot. So I got this position and others. And I didn't realize I always thought I didn't know how to talk. I mean, I'm talking now. But I didn't know that. I can talk to strange people because now I'm in that mode that this is my job. I have to provide, you know, in 16 weeks, I was supposed to give them 100 students. I give them 100 students in one month because what I realized is, with South Asian community, they're scared. So you go, you tell them they have no idea what's out there. They have no idea it's free. You know? They're like, Oh, it's free. I don't have to pay anything. Yeah. So then I got more. You know, I went to Mandir, I went to Masjid I went to go Gurudwara, went to the Buddhist temple, I went everywhere, you know. And, and this part of me, I'm a more of open minded with religion, I always find very peaceful in all different religions. And there was my plus point, because there was other person with me, and she would hesitate to go to Mandir. But I would be going to church and attending the things and go to, you know, Mandir, and I was handing out flyers and I remember in lunchtime and there was a guy who asked me, he said, Oh, so what part of India you're in I'm like, I'm from Pakistan. And everybody turned around and looked at me. But no, they were very nice. Yeah. So um, so yeah, so I didn't realize that I have that. And since I had a background in quality, I was. I did hundred it's not like Okay, I'm done. You know, in one month you got you, but I did, which they didn't have and now they're realizing that part, and I am very happy about it because they should realize it. But what I did was a student that I brought in for them. I started tracking them, right. Okay. What class they are in, you know, if they left Why did they left? Yeah. So they, they had no idea so I propose to them. I said, You know what, I've got those people here. I need to know where they are because if audit comes in they should know what happened to them. There was a government officer who came in who wanted to see the program. So, he met us and I had no idea about French Okay, I mean, he this guy was there for two hours. My manager was there for supervisor everybody speak in French. Yeah, I have no idea what they said two hours I was sitting. Yeah, after that. And my manager, she would be like, Oh, you know what he said, right. I was like, I don’t know what he said. I was so mad. I was so like, handicapped. You know. Anyway, uh, my contract ended with them. I mean, till the end, I was just giving them you know, that whole sheet that I've made in English and I give them all their registration forms around every couple of them I couldn't find so I emailed to everybody. So, I left. They didn't rehire me because I didn't know French. But now I'm still in touch with them. And now I, I've, they've told me that now the government is asking them to give them all the registration information about the students what I was giving to them, but they have no idea. So, um, so but then so once that happened I was like okay, everything on the side, I have to learn French, so I'm taking full time French classes. So, and then the friend of mine I told her about simwa recruiting so what are my skills in recruiting. So she…she asked me to recruit for her. She works as a director… as a director is for agency called a microcredit Montreal. So what they do is they provide microcredit for new businesses. And they are giving workshops for women to become an entrepreneur. So she said, Could you do that for me, for me and, you know, recruit students so I can come in and give classes here in Montreal. I said, Okay, so she's paying for my time I'm doing part time for her. And this is what I do. I go around and I to church to organizations and I talk about you know, what this is, how important it is for women to be independent even do a part time job or you know, business. And I think it's good for me because I wanted to a business but I don't know how so this workshop will be good. So um, so yeah, that's so my skills would be management skill. I'm very good in managing people. Organizing, making sure procedures are followed. Communication. That's my story strong I can I can, you know, in my French class, I was telling them about the microcredit Montreal program and I got about six people signed up. Six people signed up. So far. I have 10. She told me that she needs six for her to start the class. So, I have done I need to get some more because January's the class time. "
Me,"	We found this lawyer here. Ijhtaba found it – my husband and - The lawyer, we provide the education like we're going to school, this my certificate. My passport, marriage documents would be one thing that we provide her that and…yes, the full… how, how did we meet? What restaurants we went to, where what was the first time we met? And what did we say to each other gifts, any gifts we have given to each other. So, we are I remember taking pictures of that. How many times he had come and visit me. So, we had to, you know, the itinerary, print out all of those. How many times I went there. Even though when she did her, she documented everything. And then she sent us. She sent us the whole thing to sign and my husband just signed off but then when I got to read do it, there was so many mistakes. So, the dates were not right. And you know, because I have a quality mindset, just like okay, I cant just sign this one. I got to make sure that everything is fine. And it didn't match. I could have written better. Yeah, but yeah, so those dates we have to provide, birth certificate. I had to provide my birth certificate. It was so funny because I couldn't find my birth certificate. So I had to provide birth certificate I remember that. I didn't I didn't know what happened to my birth certificate. So now because now the whole process has changed now there's some some kind of NADRA, some kind of organisation. "
Me,"	so Yeah, a lot of technology. So we used Viber. Yes, we use fiber because that's the and we were so glad we had Vibber because we would text each other so many times call each other so many times. Emails… we used email also. Email. Yeah. So those were the two things that we used. Texting - viber for texting. And this is to mainly stay in touch with each other. I used Facebook. Yeah, we used Facebook also. Umm, yeah how cold it is. Yeah. Because I had no idea. I've never seen that cold before, and all really doesn't get this cold. Okay, Houston. You know how it is right now? I'm saying that's our cold. This is December, January. Yeah, that's it. So I had no idea and I remember I google Yes, I did Google shoes. Because he told me snow boots. And I was like yes I have my long boots and I'm okay. But he's like, No, that’s not gonna go. You need snow boots. So we Google that. es. So we move on to that goes on the map. And then some snow jacket no and shoes and. It was funny because I could not imagine you know that people wear those shoes I couldn't imagine in cities you know you look at those shoes and you think of okay, like Alaska…that's the thing comes to your mind. Like Igloo. I mean, it looks magical. I love it. It looks magical but my God, you know, you just…like the heavy jacket and then boots snow boots heavy ones, then hat, scarf, like going out you need at least five minutes to get ready you know, I mean thinking making yourself okay I gotta get out you know I have to wear all this.. and then coming back in you just have a lot of things to take out. It was funny because I went to us like I went to his friend's house for in Toronto in April. They did my dawat, you know, so I went to a friend's house and all of a sudden I see these Pakistani ladies, theyre all wearing shalwar kameez and you know, and I'm like, Oh, that's nice with the really pretty shoes, the sandals and everything. So when they were leaving and outside in the Snow. So when they were leaving, they took the shoes out, the sandals out, and they put it in the bag. And then they've got the snow boots and they put those on. They all carry their shoes with them. So that was a new thing. So that was the same month I was going back. So that April here it was snowing. In Huston it's April… there's no snow there's like, summer is coming right. So I was going back to Huston and as like, okay. It's going to be from airport to the plane so I don't even have to go outside. So I go in my chappals/sandals. So then I'm at the airport, Toronto airport. And they say, okay, the plane is ready. But it's 10 o'clock at night, but we have to go walk outside. And I'm looking at my chappals and its snowing outside, and I couldn't believe that in April it snows here. So then I walked into the snow here. So yeah, so then I walked in. I was moving this guy's arm because he was like, I'm gonna slip slip, just hold me and then went outside stairs to the plane and then went it was.. "
Me,"	I had to make friends. In Montreal I didn't know anyone. It was very different because when I moved to America I had kids there so you you kind of connect with the people who have kids right? So you connect with everybody? Yeah you just like you know make 100 friends there because they all have kids and you're just like going you know, doing dawat and all that, picnics because of the kids. Here I don't have kids. So I have to make friends and I got to used to in Huston - having my own group I didn't have a lot of friends then either either later on in life, you pick and choose and you just Just have to small group of people. You know, and that's it, you just meet. So. And here, I didn't know how to make friends. And there in Houston, I had my family, my six siblings, so I didn't really need to. If I want I could just go to their house. Here, I had no idea what to do. I had no idea what to do. And I was…the only people I know is my husband and his sister. And my husband knew someone and we would go you know, but he was, he was divorced. You know, the people don't invite single guy. The families you know, they just like to.. so he was kind of outcasted also. So he knew one or two people so we went to their house. But it's not, you know, people, they they just don't say okay, yeah, you know, well, we'll do davit.. come over, we'll do this, we’ll do that… and everybody in our age is very reserved, you know… we just got used to have our environment and now I had to make friends. So what I did was I posted on social media. There's a there is a Facebook page one Pakistani woman in Montreal, right. So now before that, my sister in law is connected with South Asian woman Community Center in downtown SOC. So she is connected with them. So they had events and she invited me there so we went there. And then my husband would be going with me also, you know, because he didn't have any friends. And now I'm his friend. And then I'm not used to of having my husband because for very long time, I was just going by myself. So poor thing he would just come with me. So, me a couple of people there and I kind of used to go there for to meet people. There I met Maya. And she told me about Pakistani women in Montreal. So then I did that. And there I posted that, you know, I'm new in Montreal. I just came here and…Do we have any meetup groups for Pakistani women or you know… I didn't have any response, but I got one response. Theres a lady, she said, I'm here new also. And, you know, we can meet or you can come to my house and she has a day care in her house. So, I just went there and she lives right close to my house. So, I kind of met her. And then we used to meet for lunch. Yeah, and she's very nice lady. Then she invited me for Eid party with a couple of other people which I'm gonna…. see in this age you don't get friendly friendly with everybody. The kind of you know, you pick and choose. So she invited me two other places, you know, other friends, but I never got that close to any of them. And then I got one person I like…so I kind of talk to her and I invited her, and then my husband knew  a lady, and she told us that she does TCF work (the citizens foundation). So she had event for that. We went to that event. And then still, I didn't know anyone, you know, most of the people. So then, there and then some new little bit here and there. And then my brother came and I like to sing, you know, I always wanted to say my, my brother can sing my father can sing, but I was a closet singer and I am a closet singer, but I have dreamed that I will be a singer one day. But um, so my brother said, Why don't you know, now you have time, why don’t you take classes for that. So then I called someone and she said, well, there is one lady and she sings really good. And she gives, you know, classes also. And apparently she lives close to my house… walking distance. So, I went to her house and start taking lessons from her and then she started inviting me. So now she is from India. So now we have… now I have a good group of people. Mostly, I don't know some for some reason I get along better with the older people. Okay, you know, I don't have young friends that many but older than me just like Auntie's in their 70s or 80s. And I would like to talk to them. So then, yeah, so then I have a very different group. I have Indian, Pakistan, Bangladeshis… everything mixed because my husband is…you know, we just don't go like okay, this is, you know. When I was taking French classes I've made couple of friends there. I made two very young girls 24 years old. I think now there probably are 30 and one is South Indian and the other one is the Punjabi Sikh. And they both are my friends, but they are like my kids age. So, I'm kind of like them, mother. So, both of them got pregnant. Both of them have babies in this month in October. One had a baby boy and the other one had a baby girl. So, I’m knitting, I’m crocheting… I just finished a blanket for the baby girl. So yeah, so that's how, that's how I made my friends."
Me,"	I'm still dealing that. Actually, actually, it was very good. It's very good. He is very nice, very open minded, and I can talk to him about anything, you know. I mean, we can be sitting in the car, not saying anything, and we still enjoy each other's company.  Yeah, it's different because I was used to just going by myself. You know, to these parties and then or, you know, anywhere, but now I have to let him know where I am, you know, like, I'm going here and come back here, you know, things like that. Or, you know, if somebody is coming to my house then you know, he has to be okay with that, too. I just have to let him know that You know, these people are coming. Friendship - I mean, I have to think about him also that we both have to get along with people because he, you know, with sometimes people… I did have to face the situation where we go into somebody's house or a gathering and then there would be a conversation about too much religion, religious conversation, and he was just like, look, I don't want to go there. So then I had to think about him. Should I invite these people over, you know, to make my group and so, you know, he's so yeah, so it's it's a different we have to. It's different in a way also because now I have to think about him, you know, making plans with my kids also, you know, going to the US, you know, how many days you're going, when are you going to come back? So, I think we both kind of appreciate each other because I never I never had a husband… you know, my sisters would be like, you know, fighting with their husband and then talking to them the next day, you know, lets go there, we went to shopping together. I never had that. I never had that. He was 18 years older than me. So, and but I didn't mind that as long as as long as there was a respectable relationship but there was no respectable relationship. There was more of I tell you to do this and you do this, So, so I never had that I always used to distant from him, you know. I was very scared of him like he can say anything or do anything. But with him, I can say anything, its more equal, you know, he's very supportive of me and we'll just hold hands in public, you know, and so, it's, it's, yeah, but uh, you know, it's funny because my friends would be telling me Oh, aap ka to honeymoon khatam nahi ho raha [your honeymoon isn’t ending]. And I’m like “haan buhdape ki shadi hai” you know, “ab kya karen” [we got married at an older age, what to do]. It was hard, because you know, divorce is a never thought in my, you know, mind that I will ever get divorced. I thought we will get old, and then kids will grow older and then he will mellow down, you know, but as much as he was getting older, he was getting crazier. The kids were going their ways. You know, and I was like, Okay, my son is not home on weekends, he's going to his friends house and then my daughter get to this age, she'll go out also. I had to take that step. You know, I had to, I had it was not easy. You know, I had to take that step. And, you know, and I never I never thought that I may meet someone because you know, in this age dating is not easy. I have met so many crazy uncles, you know, chichore [sleazy] uncles, you know, it's just like, eww"
Me,"	Okay, I think the biggest challenge I had, have is is what my future is going to be. like a career. Where would I end up, you know, because right now I'm going with anything that's coming to me, you know? What will happen? You know, I think that's… right now that's the biggest challenge. I'm enjoying things but at that time when I moved, I think the biggest challenge was to make my community you know, to make my friends to have a good circle, which I have right now. I think at that point, that was the biggest challenge because I you know, so…okay, if the spelling is not right…Uh, yeah, yeah, biggest challenge was first one was…making friends. Making like-minded friends. Yeah, not just any friends. like minded friends. And the second one is career, business, Yeah, and the other challenge is… the main challenges to keep….I just realized one thing it's funny how while I'm talking I'm pretty much realizing about myself. Okay, you know, the other challenge is…because before in Houston it was just me and the kids. two people I have to think about. I didn't, you know, don't have to think about me but yeah, to think of kids. Now I got mine two, his three, and then him, and then his, mother. You know, Challenge is to hold everyone together as a family. "
Me,"	Yeah. I've feel that. Yeah. I've feel that because…because I see where he's not doing things, right. I'm in the house. You know, I'm more living with his kids, then I'm living with mine, but I'm not their mother. And I want to do things this way to make sure everybody is is equally treated. But I think he treats some someone different than the other in his kids and then I think there's issues with that part. But since I'm in the house I have to… at one point I was involved in it… I was like okay do this do this do this. But now I'm like no I can't do this because I get frustrated because I cant you know, I face that I'm an outsider. They're not my kids because I can you know…with my kids I can just tell them whatever I wanna tell them. Like when Naz and Jami were having issues I'm like no, Naz is like, Mom Jami is doing this to me. I'm like, Okay, tell me what Jami has done. You know when you move there, he has done this. No, I'm not taking sides… If Jami isn’t doing this, he has done many other things that are right, you have to see that also, you know. So I think that's my biggest challenge now. I'm there, but at the same time I have to put that glass wall that, you know, I shouldn't be involved in it. So it's keeping up with two families… Family family crisis, two family crises. "
Me,"	Okay, well, sometimes, but now you know nothing now they don't tell me. Sometimes they tell me when they get excited but now I start to ask “kya haal hain uske, baat ki us se? You know, acha milwao to sahi, you know. So, they're getting like no mom because mom goes after like shadi shadi shadi. Mom goes like, beta Doctor hai! Laughs. "
Me,"	My fears… that im here, in this new country and what happens it didn't work out? I don't feel feel it that much. I don't feel it but it's back of my mind that what happened if something happens, you know, I have to go back. You know, what am I gonna do back there that kind of you know it's in the back. I mean there's nothing going on as such that that I will go back or something like that. But that's something that I think you know my kids are there. I'm here and I stay here because of the…because of the healthcare. If I go back there without a job, I don't have a healthcare and…So still it doesn't seem home. Yeah, it doesn't seem home. it doesn't feel home you know, even though I'm trying to make it as my home and I really like it and I'm thinking this is better because at least there is a healthcare, you can go into your doctor anytime. But at the same time, I'm thinking, you know, my kids are there you know. So that's, that's my fear and yeah, I think that's that's it. Okay. [Ageing in-laws] Its challenging because they both, my father-in-law and my mother-in-law, they were 86 and 87 at that point and they were living on their own because they had been here a very long time and they had a very active life but now when I moved here, it was hard for them. Very quickly, it was very hard for them because my mother-in-law, she cant see. She has a eyesight problem and my FIL couldn’t hear So they had to move with us. I think within a year, they moved with us. So that was a big challenge because I used to be living on my own. The whole house – it was just my house. Now I have to like, they cant, I have to give them food in a plate, they cant see, you know, or they would be, or my MIL would want me to sit down with her, or watch dramas with her. And I think at one point I did that because I was excited also that I have someone at home. I never had MIL or FIL living at home. Then it gets too much, you know. And then, that part, I still would be very respectful but at the same time I would just close the room, you know and I think that was the challenging part, and then my FIL passed away and now my MIL is by herself and shes more needy because she cant see so she gets frustrated and she… yeah that’s a responsibility.  My husband is close. Since he works from home, he would take care of them, he would give them food. He is close to his parents but at the same time he gives me room also. You don’t have to do it, I’ll do it. So, Im glad he is like that. He’s not like, well you have to take care of everything. He’ll take more… but I’ll do it because you know, what goes around, comes around. I don’t want things like that. But it was challenging because we both cant fight because if we fight then they get upset. They think that there’s something they did that we are fighting about. If im not in a good mood today then my MIL start crying and she thinks that she did something and I’m not in a good mood… maybe we are fighting because of her. "
Me,"	I think I’m eligible this year. I think I should get my citizenship but at the same time I want to check if I can still keep my American citizenship as well as Canadian. Here, I don’t think it’s a problem. I think it’s a problem in US. Somebody told me that so I have to talk to a lawyer about that. I have to find out what it is because I know if I do not have the Canadian citizenship, I will not have the, I will not get assistance from government once you get old – old age assistance. Hopefully I’ll keep both but my husband was telling me that somebody had both and the border inspector took the American passport. So that’s gonna be my challenge. I guess challenges are more than future. This is what I am realising doing this map. Look. "
Am,"	As soon as I got out of the the United States in 2012, it was already an option, Ilike, I would go abroad. Like I had my IELTS."
Am,"	I did consider like, the first priority was express entry. If I couldn’t get through then I was thinking about the provincial nomination but I got through the express entry. My initial choice were between Toronto or somewhere in Alberta because of the opportunities there. Toronto is too big and lot of competition. Ottawa being close to Toronto and smaller, so better chances for career. I did have like full time job there [in Ottawa]. Then they had some requirements in Toronto and I got a significant pay raise. So couldn’t say no to that. "
Am,"	I started research in April, applied in June, only delay work with getting the police clearance from the FBI. That took about 4 months. Apart from that, I applied in June and it was approved in August. So this is all 2017. And then I arrived on 2018. So took some time to wind up everything. "
Am,"	They were like if you don’t like what you're doing you can always quit, like our whole family, they’re like entrepreneurs. Like, I can have work in their company. Only problem is none of them were in mechanical. Like, I have studied for 6 years. I don’t want to like give that up. [drawing] It’s my first time doing this. So, [on the map] meaning that I wanted to consider places where I could speak the language. I did, like, I did learn German like the basic. Like I just didn't want to let this, like if this didn't work out, then I wanted to have an option to go there. But luckily I’m here. "
Am,"	No agents, no lawyers. IELTS for Canada and GRE and TOEFL for the US. Obviously paid for the visa… fees for that. So, GRE is a quantitative and English test – it’s a Math and English test. Those are the only ones apart from IELTS. And there was application fees, Oh, yeah, quite a bit. I applied to 7 or 8 universities and it was like $100 or $200 each time. Yeah and medical test. I didn't have police check for the USA and health insurance."
Am,"	Like a few of my friends like about 5 or 6 of us, from school and like, undergrad? university? We got plans to go to the US. When we were applying at the same place, all 5 of us got together and did it. A year worth of living, obviously fees, had to be shown at the time of the visa interview. This was completely paid for by my family. So that's commercial services for US and then Canada. Canada, yeah, IELTS – since it has a validity of like two years, I give on a 2012, 2014, 2016 so its times 3, which is kind of good, like I improved over the years. I did one in 2012 and that expired in 2014. Then again, I didn't go anywhere. I was still there so like had to do it again. IELTS and medical. I heard stories of the agents, they misuse, or are ignorant you can say, and I didn’t want a rejection because of someone else. If it’s because of me, that’s okay. Got my education assessment from WES. We had had a family auditor… he takes care of my mom, dad so was using them for few years that as well as -  Health insurance was for 3 months here. In Ontario, the health insurance is not covered for the first three months as a PR.  Only and I think Albert and another province is covered from day one."
Am,"	Most of it was online I guess, other than like friends, everything was pretty much online. The main one is with Facebook, CIC website, Google. And I don’t know the site exactly but someone suggested me to check out crime rates. Like, obviously when Im choosing where to live. Because living in Chicago, I was like it cant be worse than that. I used to hear like, gunshots outside all the time and one of my friends got mugged in Chicago. Not all of Chicago is like that but… its way safer here.  So is there an app for I don't remember I saved it on my on my laptop. Oh yeah. One of the forums is quite popular - Canada visa. Oh yeah few of the whatsapp groups. You get added on the whatsapp group to the forum, kind of, and then it goes from there. Initially I got added on to one of the groups from the forums, and then like in that group someone suggested some other groups so I went on those. And they discuss like what to do when to do? How? It did help but not to that extent. Like, I knew most of it, but just as a support, just to ask any questions it was good to have. "
Am,"	From time to time yes. I’m still active on the whatsapp group. Like, Not all the time. Not always active but I do check on that time to time. There are no changes yet I think since I arrived. It’s a good process. And it is friendly to migrants. When I came the cutoff was 430-440. I was at 487. My Masters, my work experience, and by the time I applied my age was below 30. "
Am,"	Like when I moved to Ottawa, for the first two months I would spend the day, like, looking for jobs and all that. It was pretty interesting. Everywhere I asked, they needed a licence, a mechanical engineering license and that again takes time. I have to do something till then. So I ended up working some odd jobs. I worked at the vegan cafe, a grocery store, an Indian restaurant. It was a good experience. I learned a lot. And that was, like, somehow, I came across a person when I was working at the Indian restaurant, to who led me my full-time job. He recommended me. Ottawa was easier compared to Toronto. Like here, I don't know why, but I've only been able to meet people through the Meetup app other than my colleagues. So meeting people is hard, or making friends is hard, at least in my opinion in Toronto. It’s a busy city. Yeah. There was Indian food festival. I think I went to that and met some people in Toronto. Meetup has been more helpful so yesterday I went for a hike through the app. Like that was my first time and they have hikes every alternate week so that was quite nice. I drive so that makes things convenient. I haven’t used public transit at all since I arrived in Toronto. Not at all. And I like, work on a project that involves the transit system [laughs]. "
D,	First of both personal developments. At the time I was in my late 20s.
D,"	I have citizenship of Azerbaijan and my country, umm, my family was living there for decades. Technically, I am a mix of Russian, and Jewish, and like Dutch a big mix. Post-soviet maybe – like French? But I was born there and up to my grand grand mother was born there. But we are a small ethnicity in Azerbaijan. "
D,"	At some point, maybe yes. But with time goes by, maybe it doesn’t affect me much in my case. Maybe in some other’s care yes. Sometime it affects. Sometimes its better, sometimes its worse. Maybe its like with everyone. Being a woman sometimes its better, sometimes its worse. "
D,"	So my degree was, I was, I graduated from Bachelor of Architecture from Azerbaijan University and did Regional Planning Masters in France. So, when I arrived here, so I didn't want to go to other fields because that’s the only thing that I can do. Not that that’s the only thing but that’s the thing I would like to do. Ideally it would be urban planning but that’s a bit hard to get. You need extra licences and certifications for planners. there’s like a never-ending circle of requirements. Firstly, you need education. For education you need ... like you need to start from scratch for urban planning. For architecture it’s a bit easier. I need a confirmation of my diploma but still that takes time. So I inquire with the public support companies, support for new comers who specialise in architecture so I did some coirses for architects – certain bridging programs and then I was enrolled in a 2 month placement – unpaid unfortunately but still I got a clue about how it works because its quite different from my country and from Europe. The structure is just absolutely different. When you never did this before. Here you come and everything is wood wood wood. In Europe there is good construction but not so much as here. Like here everything is much more costly, and the materials are all wood, and they measure in inches and im used to measure in meters. Its onlt now I get used to that. After the bridging program I was directed to the co-op. That was voluntary. Not like you have to go there but instead of just sitting there wasting your time, I took that opportunity. So that was in Feb to Apr. So since April I sometimes do different projects for this guy. Not regularly but the first project I did was 3.5 weeks and now its much more faster. I enjoy when projects changes regularly. He was connected to the… He had his own company about the co-op students and not only you come to work, but he teaches and supports the students from the co-op with short term projects. "
D,"	I hope to receive the governmental support for sure for the job in the same company because they require 1 year. So the government covers the part of the salary for employer. So, its 40% or 50% something like that. Its covered for the first time employer. So he didn't have any appointments before. So the government - they support the hiring of newcomers. So he was trying to hire me but the thing was the the employer needs to have his company for a year and at that time his company was 8 months. So the reason I was told is that they didn't want to emerging businesses to use this opportunity just to run their business, from scratch, they want the company that can survive so that this could be beneficial for both. So now I was waiting for this year so I am still waiting until Christmas because you never know what will happen until I have the job offer or confirmation. Because that happened to me before, when we were waiting for the response for one and a half month. I agree with the person that I will start and I did not say sorry can I go to another interview. That’s not nice. So, at the end because of this 8 months I just lost 7 weeks of sending my resumes or applying for other roles. "
D,"	I was considering... So the thing was I applied in… I started collecting documents…I cant remember when it was but late 2017. So on 2018 – yes in the beginning of 2018. Just last year. So before that I was applying for the Green card but that was like a, I was just trying for it.. like not expecting that something would happen. That was just for fun. So, and when I was applying for the Green card I thought I would also just apply for Canada. Why not also do this application. I was considering US more than Europe – like American countries or north America more than Europe. So mu country is in the middle of Europe and Asia. Australia is a bit, maybe geographically, it’s the same difference but its so far. It feels far away. When I was in my country, I was talking to some Australians and they were spending like 2 days to get to Paris or somewhere around, like 5 changes. And Canada was like 1 day in transit. Canada is more like, I understand Canada better. Australia seems very different, like a different region, also the weather is upside down. Canada is more to what I am used to. Political situation in Europe was not very nice. I don’t think its sustainable if I can say so, stable? For immigration, like where I would go would be France – where I was studying or maybe UK. For me in France the problem was language because I didn’t have enough time to study it. French people, they’re really closed. To get in that community, you need to work really hard. For UK it was hardly possible to find any immigration options and the same like, story with Brexit and all this. Its so nervous around Europe and Canada is far away from all this. Its mostly calm. Yeah, US you have some craziness on the side. Its not like in Europe you have 10 neighbouring countries and theres a lot of political pressure. At least here you feel like, its more stable. I mean there is some political issues around through US but you don’t feel the pressure. "
D,"	Honestly, I wanted to immigrate when I was a child, 12 or 13. At that age, my mother was trying to apply to Canada. You know about the soviet countries in the 90’s? It was hard times and many people were trying to immigrate at that time, but it was very hard to get the money to hire the lawyer. It was not the internet time as it is now. So, problem was the lawyer – he was certified lawyer and so actually…so, he helped around 10 families let’s say…. He sent them and then people spread the word and then second time other people came… and he just collected the money, grab the money and left and my mom was in the second part [laughs]. I was considering going to Germany before for my second year but then my university didn’t provide me some documents. So, there was some problems. I didn’t have much option. So didn’t apply to any other places and I decided to study Masters. That’s it and I moved to France and at that time, like 2007-8 there was an economic crisis which affected the construction industry a couple of years later. So, it was impossible to find a job. It was very hard. Some people were staying for PhD but, at that moment I was just tired. I thought maybe in few years. At that time I was like, no not now [laughs]. After that I came back and it was fine. I was working on a large-scale project, Asian games. So, I went to Indonesia. The environment was so nice. I wanted to stay longer. Everything was so rapid around, it was interesting. It was a great experience. It was a multicultural environment which was new to me. But, that’s about the country, the mentality – how it works [in Azerbaijan]. That was why I left – not the crucial reason but one of the reasons. It’s a little like Turkey, maybe?"
D,"	Tourism is now big in the country. It doesn’t really help the locals. Its less affordable than to go to other countries. For majority of people that live, I think that’s not good. It’s just not affordable. You get paid for example $700 a month and you spend, just to go somewhere for 2 days, like $400 or $300 and for 2 days! Its sometimes that bad. It was not like this before. Before the tourism was not so developed. So what worked for tourists is that the visas got cancelled [visa on arrival]. So they want tourists to come and spend their money in dollars, and they adjust it so it puts prices up for local people. So, for international tourists it’s still fine but for locals its more than the previous prices. "
D,"	I think that…he’s like, I prefer not to speak about it. I got a huge stress at work and at that point he said that hes done. So the only chance to immigrate legally and affordably, because I had some savings and both of us had some savings so we could spend that to move further. At the time we didn’t spend it all yet and I was lucky to get, like contact some lawyers that some people from my country recommended. It was still a risk but it’s always a risk. But there was no possibility of doing this without a lawyer. And then I just started collecting documents. They requested like, this paper, medicals, diploma, something something. I was just sending that and then after we applied, in August – we applied in March. In 6 months we got the response that we need to pay the arrival fee – the last step. I was collecting documents for 7 months – 7 months from when I contacted the lawyer and started. So, still we didn’t believe that something has happened but then we received the confirmation so, it was actually done.  "
D,	No unfortunately not. We were dating at the time. We have been married for 5 years and were like dating for eight years before that. Recently I have a problem with dates. I can hardly remember them.
D,"	No. Im not a community person. I was a community person before but with my bad experience in having good friends, I decided to stick to myself [laughs]. Also as I grow older, I become more introverted and I really enjoy being alone. I find peace of mind, I enjoy it. I still won’t say I hate people, no. But I enjoy my time alone. But with community, they have, in Pakistan also maybe you also have it, like mental things, you know what I mean? I don’t like that. I think that should be in your mind, not on the rules. Like family traditions, why? In fact in most of the families, the women are the leaders, like earn the money, and all the family survives because of them but still the man has to say his word. Its ridiculous. You know, Im here to change my society. I think im here to stay away from it. There are sometimes good people, but I want to explore people fro other places, I want to develop my community. If you want to stay within the same community, why do you move? Just stay there. That’s why I don’t understand people who become patriotical when they move here. There is not a big community here but there is. I am on a WhatsApp group and theres like 250 people on it. It was a group without a possibility to speak… I was just on there to go through the messages for immigration. I was scrolling through the names and like 200 people – too much."
D,	He was a football player but with time he went into another industry. In construction as well so same industry. 
D,"	So lets start from, so from my city. That’s the city where I studied. That was an academic visa. Still Schengen visa but study visa. I don't know if I remember correctly. Then actually I had a 3 months’ work permit visa afterwards in 2011. Should I continue with my work visas? Are you sad because my map will look small? So then 2018 – Permanent residence visa. So Toronto. I was applying to Ontario program so that was express entry and the thing is I don’t know French so it cancles Quebec, Alberta and Calgary. So I didn’t consider that part. I like big cities. I stklll don’t like to live in the center but I think there are more possibilities and opoortunities for work here, and for professional development and so that was the major thing. "
D,"	So for this one, so this one will be – commercial right? So here, I had university fees. At that time it was round 2000 euros a year. After that they moved up to like 7000. When I considering applying…that was 2010. Initially I was thinking about Sweden. They had at that time the architecture university – it was free for international students you just had to pay, like student and teaching fee which was like 150 euros. But on the year I was applying, it was shifted up to 25000 euros. From zero to 25000. So I was looking for others and France was fine. After I left, they moved it up but not like 25000. It was still reasonable. You can afford to study there. And 25000 was just one year so you can imagine studying the whole masters. "
D,"	I did not work but I received governmental subsidiary, like that was student support. So that was selective. If you are a good student you will receive that in 4 months. I also did IELTS [to study in France] – academic exam. Some of my friends they were using companies connected to universities but that was for UK. But the education in UK is huge money. We did both – IELTS academic and general fro both of this [France and Canada], lawyers – like lawyer company. They have so offices in Ukraine, in Toronto and some other places. I think HO is in Toronto and then there is branches. Its Canadian licensed lawyer. Most of the dealing was done online and then after the big chat that I want to apply, there was conference or seminar in my city so they said that if you want to meet her and see her, you can. So we just went and met and I would say that it wasn’t that personal meeting. You can ask questions in 5 minutes and understand how they work, and also trust. So went to the seminar before using. Other things were medical, transcripts, WES, translation. So my husband took English courses because, I was main applicant but he still had to do the test for some points. "
D,"	Of course, okay you can figure out of lawyers but my mom had the bad experience so I was careful. Honestly I found this lawyer through my mail specialist. The person who brought my mail. You know they have a huge network; they know so many people. She said that couple of her clients, they left with the help of a lawyer. But she was still afraid to recommend me. Until the last day she was worried that if something goes wrong she will be responsible. So, she had a bit of stress too. But it was fine. It was more, I suppose safe, that she was a part of my network, like you know the people, at least through someone. That was pretty fine. That story – like it happened to my mom in late 90s. Now I heard some cases but I don’t know if they are certified people because I know now they should be certified. At that time, the whole immigration process was complicated. To get through that you need time, you need hours of research. But still you get what I mean. That’s why I prefer to use a lawyer. Even the date, the date you apply plays a role. The same application a couple of weeks later could be different. So now, I know they should be certified and you can check them online. At that time, I don’t know, maybe I was lazy.. It was comparing to the salaries I get in my country, it was expensive. Considering I managed to save money working on the international project, I was fine. If I didn’t do the Asian games project, I wouldn’t be able to do this. "
D,"	Honestly, I did IELTS three times. It was so ridiculous because once I had a mark of 8, at least 7.5 or 8. So average was 7.5 but the minimum mark for each section should be 7 and I don’t know why, couple of times….once I had 7 and overall was 7.5, once I had 6.5 and 9…so still in average it was fine but not 7 in each. So I had to go 3 times.  Also, I did translation services of Diploma, and the Minister of Foreign affairs confirmation for Diploma, like conformation by local authority. Also, here, that was for my husband mostly. "
D,"	I needed the technology for everything because I was sending for here except for WES and some transcripts because that was by mail. So here it was email – all coordination and registration and results [IELTS] – all communication was like skype, emails. Also, I will not mark the rest because that was in person, translation was in person, WES was by mail. The transcripts I had requested by main from my French university, so they had to send to it WES directly. I cant say I studied a lot but what I studied was enough for me to understand that I need to hire a lawyer. I'm really lazy person. I'm not so stupid but I'm too lazy [laughs]. I used the internet mostly to get general information on immigration. I don’t know exactly but the governmental immigration website, CIC… and upon arrival same website for finding my realtor… that was the first website, I have it in my email [checks email]. And I was using WhatsApp mostly before arrival. That was only discussions. Now I join FB groups but then it was mainly that. I still use Whatsapp mostly for family and friends lets say. Here I used more skyping, and emailing still was common practice. I used FB but just scrolling – not much. Maybe just social groups. You start talking to people and then you get busy and don’t reply and then it comes up that you didn’t respond for a week and im that person, I feel ashamed to write afterwards again so sometimes it just goes vanished. I hate the discussion forums. Im not in that. "
D,"	I don’t have a big family. Significant I would say the support from my mom – in both cases. Both emotional and financial, I would say, until…lets start from here [France0 Financial support for sponsorship, I’m the only child and…. here and here [Toronto] mostly emotional, sometimes financial by mom, Toronto is an expensive city. So that was the JVS company that directed me to the bridging program. So that was the JVS employment services for placement and support with application to governmental program, support for employment for future employment and still they have covered some expenses like free books for the course, business cards. So here the student support was financial. That’s it for now. "
D,"	Shes alone at the moment. That's the thing she needs to not accept, to over come at some point because after sometime when I get an opportunity to work and become more stable, I will bring her here because otherwise we both would stay there and having no big perspectives so its better to hope for that now. I don’t know if I could explain that. In the future, but not like in a year or 2. Shes working now. Shes fine now. Shes not an old lady with a cat or somethings – its not a depressing situation [laughs]. I lived with my grandma and mther before marriage. When I got married 5 years ago, we lived separately. Just me and my husband. "
D,"	All these challenges or obstacles you face, once you arrive, sooner or later you will solve them. So this one, not big one, missing.. like my husband he has a diploma that he didn’t actually receive because people in the university, they were lazy and they didn’t do it – So diploma is like a book so they just sent it without transcripts and all. Missing pages in the diploma. We knew the people who were working in the university so they solved our problem fast. If we wouldn’t know that, because that was the time of summer, if we wouldn’t know these people, it would extend it for 3 or 4 months and still we need to go and ask them. You know sometimes they send it somewhere else. We managed to solve this in 2 or 3 weeks. Its not so much considering that they had to dig, take it out of the archives and do the job, and to stamp it, and to sign it. I was surprised it was solved that fast. The challenge – the biggest challenge and still for now is like, employment and in my case, first thing that is challenging is that there is no Canadian experience which they stick to no matter where you work. It can be McDonalds, or any other place, cleaner, doesn’t matter. If you don’t have Canadian work experience, it reduces your chances of employment. So, lack of Canadian experience and they want it usually longer than a year. I have here like 5-6 months. They usually write like 3 years on Canadian experience, 5 years of Canadian experience in the job ads. I find it a challenge because that’s n ot fair. The thing is that if I was told that they don’t care the skills in Canada you have so even the cleaner, or some service jobs – they still would consider it a Canadian experience. Even if you apply for design but you haven’t worked in design, they still would consider you. But I think that’s the perception coz I was working in an international environment and I know the system – how it works. So maybe for some people its important. You also have interviews for that to understand that people can work or not. But on the point of applications, you should not just throw the paper without looking at it. Certifications, licensing, there is also another local expect for WES, another diploma confirmation. So, WES works only for arrival. Here, you need to go to another, in my case. WES only works for immigration purposes. Generally, its good. I had it added in my resume but actually, the diploma is confirmed by WES. This certification, this should be a CACB authority – that’s architecture board. Im not sure if planning has it as all. But they are some courses that are not approved at all. But I hope to do that in some time because it is still costly. The challenge I would say, is finding an apartment because you don’t have a credit history and that reduces your chances. We behaved well and very nice, really because I have education and I can say that im not going to not pay you money. I don’t want that problems. I think that’s – maybe that’s a perception but that still works in some cases. I found the driving licence a major obstacle for me. Yeah, coz I didn’t have a car before. I had a license back in my country before. Here the system is.. first of all you get the G1 which is training. Then after a year you still can drive only with a person who has the G4. I can only drive on my license only for 30 days or 60 days. And I failed it too. And the thing is I need a confirmation from my country to get the licence directly but that’s an issue now that I am here. And still this is an obstacle for jobs as well because even if I have a good commute to the location of the interview, most of the cases they ask about the driving license. That’s an issue because in most of the job descriptions, it is written that they require a G4 driving license. So for me, its like a huge… its not a challenge, its an annoying. I decided to wait for the confirmation from my country because I don’t want to go through the test again, because what if I don’t pass it again. When I have this letter, they allow me to get the license directly. I just applied it today. That was local fee plus payment to home country embassy for driving experience confirmation. [husband] did that already. So he did that I didn’t and we decided to do that because at least one of us would have it. "
D,"	I heard a lot of complaints from the people for here. Always the people who stay here say that go back. There's some sort of people are never satisfied. They're always complaining. So I just try to avoid this people. That was on the forums maybe just maybe once or twice on YouTube, by community. They complain in some cases. Like what happened was my husband was addicted to youtube before arrival to Canada. Like last two weeks. He was just sitting so stressed. I just asked…What are you? Why are you so stressed? It looks like so bad he told me. I said Why? And he said I watched it on YouTube. I was like can you imagine any normal person was satisfied with his life, coming to YouTube and saying how good it is? No. Usually people come to complain. You only hear mostly the negative. Especially for post-soviet people..the mentality of our people. It's not only them…. I am like this too, but not so much. I hope so. Always complain to find the bad things, to discuss it…this could be better or I had it better before. Usually you watch it in your own language and this people, when you Google it, it comes out as research. You see the negative just stop watching that please please…And he said like yeah, maybe you're right. And really the fact that maybe we didn't meet the circumstances this people met when they came. Its like I've got a I had a little allergy, and its cancer. Yeah youre gonna die according to Google. "
D,"	Maybe in retirement. At my home country I was moving. 4 times, I was changing my"
D,"	I think I did a good job. The whole journey, I can say everything was on time. Like if i got to immigrate at the age of, after University, everything has its own benefits. At the time I had to come back because I didn’t plan much. But afterwards, when I came back, I got married. I had the job I had the job very interesting job I wouldn’t get in France at that level. Oh, so that’s something here - for Junior position they consider me as overqualified. In intermediate positions, I don't get to that stage. So, in many cases, they…when I applied for the project technician lets say, they say you need to go more to design. When I go to design, they say I don’t pass the search engines. So, I become may be overqualified or under qualified. Overqualified for junior and under qualified for senior. "
D,"	Umm yes, One thing about the choice of the city is that… most cities in the"
Ol,"	That was the main one. I would say there are other factors that, that I know when I think back at the time, I know like one was, I think I wanted to reinvent myself. That's one thing that I couldn't be. I couldn't do it in Mexico. Another thing I would say I wanted to experience a different culture. I worked for a few months in Spain. Yeah. And I really liked it. But I also wanted to go to North America, and I don't like United States or Canada was my first option."
Ol,"	We consider Montreal and Vancouver at some point, but our main choice was always Toronto mostly because this at the time, where we knew it was like the financial centre of Canada first. So, All the money's here. So, you want a job, mostly the jobs are paid well here. And the second one is somewhere where there was a plan to expand Ontario's technology budget to make it easier for IT companies to come in, starting in 2015, or something was 2016. So, I read that. And I remember it caught my eyes like, well, it's better to be there to have to know some people were ready when when this comes. It's going to be huge. And it's coming right now. You can see now, some bunch of technology companies opening up many branches here. "
Ol,"	So student visa was the last option. The first option was PR. At the time, there was no express entry. So we applied and we got invited for an interview to go to the PR. But the interview was scheduled for 27 months after we got the invitation. So, a little over two years old, we go the invite in 2012 and the interview was scheduled to be in 2014.. Yeah, it was. It was not it was not entirely the express entry. So this express entry is amazing. Back then was like you submitted all the papers. Waited we waited for almost a year to receive an answer. You get an answer and then saying, Hey, we know we like you. But again, we have received your your papers. Now you can come for an interview in 27 months. Express entry started… I think was like 2016,,, should be 2016 or maybe 20, late 2015 that it started. So all of this sort of programs like the Canadian experience class… they existed, okay, but it didn't have Express entry.. So extress entry is just the way you select applicants. But back then before Express entry, you submit something… you wait for a year, a couple years. And then at some point, you get a letter that says “Oh, thank you”. Actually for the podcast. I interviewed one lady and she said that she applied six years. Six years later, she got the invite. So like people are just kind of hoping for the best."
Ol,"	We didn't want to wait. And it would have been kind of we received the invitation kind of at the same time that this president won the election. So, it was like, No, we need to go somewhere else. So, I started looking for a job in my field. But it's really hard to get a job if you're not in the country. So, I never got and I got a couple of interviews, phone interviews, and when I tell them that, and say but I just need a job offer and then I'll get the permit. And they were like yeah, no. It was a little challenging. So, we tried that for a few months. And then we were working with an agency that was helping us with the immigration process. And they said, okay, you have another option. You can go as a student. One of you goes and studies a postgrad program and the other one gets automatically.. they get a work permit. So, so we decided that I was going to be the one studying. My wife didn't want to study. So I took the fall because I didn't want to sit and say I don't like school. So, it's like, Okay, I'm good. And, and we get and I think that process took us like two months. Like from the moment we apply to the college, they said, Yes, like two days. We sent all the papers; we got the work permit and the student permit in less than two months."
Ol,"	How do I identify myself? I knew it was skilled. I knew I was sure what I was doing. I had been doing project management for software projects, for years. There was a lot of things that I didn't know, at the time. But I don't think my perception of myself is that's really what you're asking my perception of myself, I thought of myself as a skilled worker immigrant I would say. Like, I knew that I had the skills to get a good job and all that. Is that kind of question. Yeah, and I think studying here, the HR course was pretty healthy. Just to, because you know what, it's funny because I don't think it happens a lot in Latin America. And I don't know if other countries but at least in Mexico, it happens a lot that you see people from the US or Canada and you automatically assume that everybody knows more than you. Just because they come from the first world country they do they have access to better and we don't, all those kind of things when you automatically assume that they might be better than you. When I went to school, the good thing is that most most of my classmates were from from here. And I realized that no, everybody's the same. Everybody's human. Everybody has their flaws. And they don't have any. And I noticed that because to be fair, I think it was a it was part of the privileged generation. I was able to go to private schools in Mexico and really good private schools. So, all the knowledge that I have was way bigger than the knowledge that my Canadian classmates had and it's funny because there's things that I knew from Canada that they didn’t know. And we would just start talking about Mexico or another country. They were like, yeah, I have no idea, Mexico is the beach and maybe some kind of ruins but that's it. So I started realizing that my knowledge and my skills were even superior than a lot of people, but not because, not in a cocky way that yeah, I’m better than them. It's just that I think was privileged enough to have a good education. And, and another thing that I always I love, I love learning, always doing things. So, I think that part of myself helped me to understand that prejudice that I've had before was completely wrong. Not because I'm from Mexico, I know less than them. We are all humans; we are here to learn. You're not less than the other ones. It's not that I started thinking on you guys are less. Also, like, you know, speaking English, for me was like, I learned English when I was a kid. And I was like, Oh, yeah, I need to pronounce everything perfectly, or they're gonna make fun of me or no ones gonna take me serious, or I need to write everything perfectly. And then you realize that people don't really care as long as they understand you. "
Ol,"	A little bit…not involved. I wouldn't say I'm not politically active but I'm, I used to read a lot, news and not only here but from all over the world. I think Canada is. Canada is a very conservative country. Toronto is a bubble. Toronto is… for me it's great and that’s why I want to do the podcast in Toronto because for me Toronto is amazingly good. You have no 50% people here immigrants and and I even in my job I think Canadians are the minority. We have like six Canadians and 50 immigrants so it's a for me it's a bubble and I like the bubble. That's why I live here. But if you go outside if you go to small towns, it's completely white towns and they're really nice people and then might not discriminate you but they are the ones who got Doug Ford into power. They are the ones who are going to be voting conservative this time. So, it's a it's a polite, it's an open society, but still a conservative society. If you think about it, getting divorced here, you need to, I think be separated for a year or may prove that there's some kind of physical violence. And when you think about the most progressive country even in Mexico, you can get divorce because its like I don't want to be married with this guy anymore. It’s like okay fine sign this and you’re divorced. That's it. So, this kind of things actually made me think.. like even with Europe. Like one of the more progressive countries like Spain, it's kind, its way behind. "
Ol,"	Let's start from where from here. I have nothing. So, let's say I was here it was in Mexico. And then right now I have a PR in Canada. Okay. So what I did, I started here. So at the beginning based I told you we were doing with an agency in Mexico. So, they suggested to apply for the PR as a skilled worker. So that I would say that happened here. She was like a PR application, and was skilled worker was. Oh, that's another thing and right now you have the express entry and depending on your points, you apply for something. Back then you needed to apply to something in particular. Either you applied for a Canadian experience PR or skilled worker PR. So, you had to pick one. So, we applied for skilled worker. We, when we didn't apply, we were submitting all the papers and or the agency something changed then. This was the, this was December 2009. Okay. Something happened. I don't remember what, but something changed for the next year. So starting in January, there's something changing. We didn't have all the requirements and papers and all that. So we basically discarded this. And then we went just like Okay, now let's apply for PR, but it was for Provincial Nominee. That one was for Quebec. This is the time when we started learning French right, and this happened. I think we did. It was early like January or February when I say February 2010. We applied for this, started learning French and all that, but they told us was like, it's gonna take a while. And when when you get it, you're gonna be, you're gonna have to submit your French tests and all that. So, you have like a year for you to learn French. Because I told you, it used to take a long time to get an invitation and then we just waited. And I don't know, let me check, we were right here in 2013. So, it was 2012 it was the summer of 2012. Yeah. So on the summer of 2012 was let's say, July. So yeah, it took two years. We received the invitation for the interview. And, and this was related to this one [Quebec provincial nomination], but the promise that the interview was going to happen in 2014. So we said like, No, we don't want to do that. And so we asked for options. And he said NAFTA. NAFTA is an option. So we started looking into NAFTA, when there was some North American Free Trade Agreement. So, the problem with this I mentioned is that getting a job from outside the country will be hard. So, this didn't work. Then, it was, was that was our issue I want. No, I'm mixing dates. This happened in 2011. Yes, 20 11 and this was going to happen in 2013 because it was not July was like almost like the end of the year, like October so October 2011 is when we received the letter, then we thought about the NAFTA. And I started looking for a job back then. And I think it took me like six to eight months or something to realize that I was not going to get a job and I was applying it was. But it was the problem with this I was applying the same way would apply in Mexico. just reading it and sending it so didn't work. So then in Well, this actually happened in 2011 and 2012 is when this guy the president won. So this one we said like you know what, we can't we can't stay here. So we applied for the student visa. Well, we started considering, we didn't apply yet. We started considering. So we started considering this, but then I got a I got a I got assigned to a project in Spain. So, I moved to Spain. The original idea was to move in September here. So we're thinking about planning for September. But then this is a great opportunity. It was $9 million project. So, it wasn't really great on the rest of the international experience. It was moving to Spain, I was going to work for the UK. So basically travel between Spain UK for a few months. So I thought it was going to be quite cool, its gonna look great on my resume. So, I cannot. I mean, we can. It's gonna be a six month project. So we can feel we can do this later. We can we can apply for for coming in January or that so we kinda waited. And then we started applying for student visa in October but then I was in Spain so we didn't have all the documents. So, we gave up and decided to apply for April. So, this is what happened. So in April. So, so we started thinking about this we ended up flying formally in well, we actually applied in October 2012. But then we delayed it onto the the summer semester. So I was in Spain from September to December. And then I went back to Mexico and it was kind of crazy because we didn't finish the project. I was working in Mexico but we Spain's timezone. I was waking up at one in the morning started working at two in the morning oh wow and by noon it was done but it was super tired yeah but at the to the story so um so we applied back we applied then we asked the college to not to apply for the winter semester we applied for summer semester and on April 29 2013 we arrived together and this was I had a student permit and my wife had a work permit. So a year past and after a year I got the so it was kind of the same, let's say April 2014. I got my work permit. At the time I got a job. Not this one I got another job that was like a super crappy job with super entry level, really bad job. That was on HR because we have we had in the program, in the HR program, we had a co-op semester, and I got a co-op position in that place. And after the four months as you're like, Hey, we want to keep you they offered me like your shitty salary. And the job was really bad. But I felt at the time I didn't have any options so I was like Yeah, I need to get a job. And also not because I didn't have any options as a person, but because I needed to start building my Canadian experience, because you needed I think, two years to apply for that because back then it was still this program that I was telling you. So when I needed to work for two years in Canada to apply as a permanent residence. So that's why I accepted. But then that worked till 2014 and then 2014 then in 2015 again around the same time in 2015 my work permit expired which was only one year, they only give you the same amount if you work for less than leave us to study for less than two years. They give you a work permit for the exact amount of time they work. But if you study more than that, they give you three years. But I only studied one year so I only had one. Yeah, here is when I applied for the NATFA. And because we already had a job in this company and for the NAFTA, you have to be you have to be working in certain professions. Not all professions can for the NAFTA. But technology is one. So if I hadn't stayed in the other job, I wouldn't be able to apply for the NAFTA. So then I got my NAFTA work permit for another year. Was in one year of two years? Okay, so we got 2018 we got the university in 2017. So, this was two years, so I got it in. Yeah 2015. I had to renew it at some point because it was you had to renew it every year. But I got this one on to like for two years. So you have to renew it. And then starting on early 2017, let's say February. I started applying for the PR. The first time that I applied by myself, I got denied and I got the denial around my birthday so it was May. It's kind of ridiculous when I was submitted all the papers I forgot to upload the translation of our marriage certificate and instead of the saying hey you're missing the translation, Can you send it back? They actually denied and declined the whole application. Yeah, and that's that's when I say that society might be open but you have some people that are still not because one of my friends forgot to upload their passport, which is even worse than the marriage certificate and they came back like hey, we're missing this documents. Could you please upload them? He did and it went smoothly. In my case they just did this. I was really upset. I called them and nobody cared. Yeah, and actually they told me that it's totally depends on the person who's reviewing your profile."
Ol,"	I could. Okay, but I do have time because the thing is with the work permit, that you cannot be more than three years with a work permit… temporary work permit. You either go back to a country or you become a permanent residency, right? And if you count this work permit was two years of NAFTA, I didn't have any choice. And the good thing is that the company where I'm still at the they really liked me and they valued me so they hired a lawyer and the lawyer reapplied for the PR and we did this process right after I got to do now which was around my birthday, so say May 2017. We apply for the PR. This time, the lawyers did everything. And nothing was missed. But it's so expensive that if it wasn't the company, I wouldn't be able to pay. I think the bill ended up being like $12,000. And they paid for it, I wouldn't be able to pay for that. So I'm really I'm really thankful. I'm really grateful for them. They couldn't sponsor me because there was some restrictions. And the lawyer basically analyzed everything. And they said, this is the best approach. They did it. And it actually worked because on September 2017 we got our PR. So, you see, it's like, what, like five months or four months. And so, we got all the papers and everything. So, the only thing we needed to do was to go out of the country and return as a landed immigrant, which we did in October. We actually, we celebrate, we took a two week trip to the UK.  We toured a lot of places over there. And when we came back, we landed as immigrants in October 2017.  I think you can, if you don't want to go out of the country, you can schedule an interview with some government agency. And then you can just go there and they do all the paperwork for you, but it's faster if you go out and come back. Most of my friends that I have a flight like that. Most of them have… they drive to Buffalo, and they come back. I mean, you still need to use lead someone to actually see that you're actually the person who’s arriving? And I think the airports and the borders of they already have an infrastructure. So why spend more money having an office? If someone can just like in the end, I think the way they see it is, you're the one who's going to be wanting the permanent residency. So if you cannot go out of the country come back then...its your problem. I think it's efficient. And I think it's saving overheads. And this happens like all the work permits, they just arrive by mail. But the PR, it's different, like some kind of a ceremonial system. For us it was great because we arrived late at night. I think we are flight landed at maybe two in the morning. So, the immigration office at Pearson was empty. So, it took us like five minutes to get the PR card so well they print the cards. So you can well I guess they take a picture of their So did they take the picture there? No, they use the picture that you submitted. So actually, they could print them and mail them to you. But anyway, thats the process. You need to go out and come back. "
Ol,"	First we paid in Mexico for another lawyer which was the one who was helping us to do this because when we started we know nothing knew nothing so so we paid for a lawyer here we had to pay for translations of all the documents in the beginning. We had to pay for a lot of translations because every time you apply, they need IELTS, you need to pay for someone to assess and I think I had to pay now that I'm going to be applying for the citizen I think I need to do the exam again. Anyway, I applied here, then. So, we applied here. We did the IELTS here for English language, then we around here. It was right before we got the invite thing we started we applied…We presented our  I don't remember names for French, French language, French and English. We pay for those. We got here we paid for the college program. It's like three times more than what a resident or citizen would pay - 17K. So it was the cheapest one. But my friends from from here they were paying like four or 5000 so I paid for that. Then I think every time that we applied, I had to have to pay for something it was like for the PR was worse because then you need to get your criminal record check. You need to get your criminal records from your home country as well. You need to get everything translated like everything marriage certificates. All that. What else?...because at the time you had to be for a visa as Mexican, you have to apply for a visa for to enter Canada, so you have to apply for that as well. Yeah, we have to do a health assessment for the PR only. That was only for PR. What else? There were three language tests because they expire in 2 years and I have to do a fourth one now for the citizenship. Because according to but according to the government, you forget the language in two years, I guess. I don't know.  But we did pay for the place to live. What else, what else,  "
Ol,"	Most of the research done if not all, was done online. I'm very… I mean I am a software engineer, so I'm very comfortable doing that. So, at the in the beginning, my main was like, Google search And I used to check a lot of blog posts, blogs that talk like people. I think I noticed that when people move here, they're so excited. And they want to share their experience. So, they start writing the blog. But then after three posts, they never write anything else. But at least you have the beginning. So, you have something. Social media. Facebook, I would say, Mostly because there's a lot of newcomers to Canada group. So, Mexicans in Toronto, those kinds of things that are completely useless but I checked them. There's there was a blog that was written by... It was from Latin America, maybe Colombian and it was in Spanish then they explained the shock that they got when they went to the grocery store like prices and they were looking for bananas is like there's no banana, because it is winter. And for me, it was like, Where am I going? Then you get here and you realize it doesn't matter if it's winter, you get bananas because globalization, but I just for me at the time, that was shocking because like, where am I going like, if I want to eat pineapples, you cannot eat that unless it's summer, which is a complete lie. So, but maybe they…. maybe they weren't living in Toronto, maybe they were living in one of those small towns that I was mentioning. But for me it was kind of shocking. So, it actually gave me some ideas on what to expect. That I think was a good thing because when I got here, the culture shock for me was almost minimal. It was almost nothing.  Because I already did a lot of research. I used to work with a lot of people from the US so for me, it was not a huge deal. and I like the cold. So, I was okay. For my wife it was a little bit different. But regarding social media, I think the main reason why I think they're useless and mostly when when some blog posts it's a little different because it's someone who actually wants to share their experience, when they take the time to write some social media its mostly someone who knows nothing. x asks a question, and everybody answers whatever they think it's the right answer. So, it's like one person saying, Hey, I'm going to.. okay, remember that one. Someone said Hey, I'm moving to Toronto and I don't want to buy a car. How much should I save for, for public transit? How expensive it is. And to be honest, if you just Google Toronto Public transit, you see the first but someone asked that. And then there are little things like you're going to spend like $300 a month and then someone else is like you can buy a pass it is going to be 100 bucks. And the thing is that because there's so many answers, and most of them are wrong, that just confuse you. So, I gave up with social media, I think at this stage, and most of the most of the research I did after was either blogs that I considered more serious, or immigration lawyers websites. I saw that that that was a lot lawyers, websites. There was a lot of information there. And podcasts, And one of the things I like about the podcast is that I think I only found one that was talking about Canada, Most of them were talking about the the US or Europe. And I found it was people talking about their their experiences, but it was kind of interesting to learn how the shocks that they were Facing. So that happened way before we got here. So we did all the research. And good, I would say most of the research was done. And also the CIC website. The Canadian immigration one - That one I think I checked in every day like anything that happened is checking. And news from the global mail. I subscribed to the global mail for a bit in Mexico, just to learn a little bit of a culture and stuff like that."
Ol,"	The guys who actually did my process over here, that's Greenland's bgl. I check their website but I, at the time I found them like a little too poshy. It ended up I mean, they're super expensive. I remember these guys because it shocked me the the cost at the time. There was another one. But it was around when I was in Spain. So, it was around this time here. Around this time, I found it when I was in Spain, and I found it and I remember it was so good that I sent a link to my wife. It was great. It was a Lawyer, but he had a blog in there. And every, every week or every two weeks he posted something about Canada. Canadavisa.com. Okay, so I guess it Yeah, it's kind of famous. Yeah, I remember I saw it when I found in Spain because I had nothing to do with my wife state and Mexico. She was like, Yeah, I was doing research. "
Ol,"	My family in Mexico. It was about my mom and my sister and my dad a little bit. But mostly when I talk about my family, its my mom and sister. I don't think I ever hesitated coming here because of them but it affected me because we're really close. So just one example we used to go to do have a coffee every week, like my mom after work, and then my sister arrived and then I arrived and it was like a ritual every week. Those little things affected me. And it was over here like Around this time, she was like my family. And I have a group of friends that we've been friends since University and we used to play video games together and play dungeons and dragons together,  like nerdy stuff. But we used to do it every week, every Thursday. So that was one of the things one of those rituals that you know you're not gonna have even when I moved here when we when we moved over here. So when we moved here I started to keep the show my d&d group these guys we started playing Dungeons and Dragons online. So they met in one of them's house and they just put a computer with my face there. It was fun, and I think is one of the things that I needed to still feel that I was in. Yeah, one of the good things is that I'm, I'm a very social person, but I really, really enjoy time with myself. So the first month when we got from April 29 to early June, I didn't have a phone. So, my birthday is in May 26. So, nobody called me on my birthday because there was no phone to call me. And I really enjoyed that month of having no connection with the world. I really enjoyed it. I don't know if I would do it again. But I really enjoyed it. So, focusing on another thing I was starting school was But anyway, those kind of things. One of the things I think helped me a lot is when I started when I started school at George Brown. People here were really friendly. There was like half immigrants, half non-immigrants. And and, and we started hanging out from time to time and all the things that I was way older than most of them. So those things as like, hey, let's go clubbing and I was like no Im not doing that. So those kind of things played a huge role. And another thing when I got here I one of my ideas of one of the things I wanted to do was to blend into the pot, I need to blend into the Canadian culture. So, I remember I was telling my wife that I'm not gonna talk to anyone who speaks Spanish. You're the only one and just because we're married but I actually avoided Spanish speaking people because I wanted to, to improve my language. That was the main reason because I thought if I start hanging out with Mexicans, then I'm never going to be speaking English so how can I improve. How am I gonna get there? How am I gonna get the job. How am I gonna give it all back?. So, I avoided that. So my wife started, my wife was a little different. And she wanted to have some connection with the Mexicans society and the culture. So, she started hanging out with them. So most of the time I spent with the only people were talking Spanish with was my wife and my friends from here and my mom and my sister. Here I tried not to and it took me maybe a year to start realizing that I was being an idiot, so I started just hanging out. Now I don't care. The time it was my my idea was like, I need to do this because I when I moved I was 35 is like, boy, I'm already 35 I need to get a job, I need to to make things work for me right now. Because if not, I'm going to be 40 and then I'm going to still be in a shitty job. That was my idea at the time. "
Ol,"	The main challenge that I got was when I had to get stuff from Mexico. Yeah, like it was for the PR. It was it was actually around this time after we got approved. There was a lot of stuff that we had to get from Mexico like, criminal record so bad. It's a pain because you either had to fly there and do it yourself or fill out bunch of papers to do it. And I'm completely forgetting something here, between the NAFTA and the PR. I got a bridge permit. Bridge corporate. So what happened is that my NAFTA was, was going to be expiring in May or something or April or May because every year, and but so we need a bridge work permit. So we apply I applied, actually the company did it because it was around here. So between this, they only need to say you need to apply for the PR, and you need to submit the documentation to reapply it and you get a bridge work permit. So I applied for that. It was kind of optional. But because there's another thing that's called implied status, I don't know if you've heard about now. So if your Work Permit expires, but you're already applied for the permanent residency you're legally working in living in Canada. But and it's but you cannot leave and come back you need to stay in Canada. But in this case, the one that I applied to the bridge, it's a permit that allows you to go back and forth. They need to travel. So I couldn't stay here because because work I need to go back and forth. But I have friends that they weren't able to go. They didn't apply for this because it costs money right? And when you're in my case, didn't matter because my company was paying for everything. But it costs more money and you're an immigrant usually are counting every penny so I have friends that didn't apply for this. They waited for a few months between their work permit expired all that and they couldn't leave the country. Actually here's a sad story. One guy that I know his father died and he couldn't go back to Mexico. If you leave, you need to wait outside the country to a resolution. it has it's flawless. Its getting better I think with the express entry and all that's getting way better. It's faster. Like if you think about it in 2010 or 2011 we applied, and it took us almost two years to get an invite for an interview two years from then. And if you think about it, I got the approval in four months with express entry. So, there's improvement. Express Entry started I think it was don't quote me on this but I think it started around here is when express interest started. "
Ol,"	I think, honestly, I think my path to get the PR was very smooth. Because even though I had to go and go through all this work permits, I always had support from either my wife because she was making the money to pay for things, or the company. They didn’t sponsor me but they paid for lawyer. So in this sense, I would say I was very lucky. But because there's people that I think our issue was when wanted to go to leave Mexico as quickly as possible. That’s why we actually went through all this. If we didn't, we were like, okay, we'll stay in Mexico for a couple more years, then we would just get the invite for the PR, and then we just come in. And that's it. Yeah, we wanted to leave quickly. So we went through, I don't know how many work permits. So, the student permit, then the work permit. Then my two NAFTA permits, my bridge work permit, then my denial of the PR and then the PR. So I think I went through all the permits available. Laughs. But I mean, I suppose that the benefit of getting out of Mexico like and I would do it again.. For us was more important to leave the country than to do all this. I mean it’s a pain. Every time that you need to apply for a new work permit its like let me resurface all the documents that I sent last time. You need to keep track of every trip that you did. I used to travel a lot for work. So, it is a pain. I tried to avoid going back to Mexico. Mostly because… there's two things. Firstly, I hate spending my vacation in Mexico, because if I spend money and time and vacation days I want to go somewhere new. And second,  it's very stressful to go to Mexico so well, family My family is very close. Not my close family but my extended family - like my aunt's my uncle's, my cousins, and my wife's family like we get there and everybody wants to see which is super nice. It's really nice. I really love that, my friends is that where are you coming? Let's grab a coffee let's grab a beer. But that means that every day for as long as you're there, you have something to do. You have breakfast with someone, lunch with another person, dinner with another person, drinks with another one, coffee with another one. And then you met like five or six people on a day. And you get home and we should because one time we tried to stay at a hotel. And my mom was like, she felt that we dont want to stay with her. And we ended up cancelling the hotel and staying with our families. And that's the thing like you have to be with them. So, there's no time. There's no time to relax. Yeah, so that's the stressful part. Also, Mexico is growing violent. It was violent. It was it was the crime rate was really high when I left. Now, it's worse. So maybe It's the same amount crimes the problem is that there are harder crimes. Like before you someone like I got, I was mugged five times in Mexico City which is normal. I don't like I don't know anyone that lives in Mexico that hasn't been mugged or something. That’s normal. The problem is that when that happened I was younger and all that, they beat me a couple of times to take my wallet. Now people have started killing people to take their wallet or their watch or the car so I don't want to get killed because I'm driving a car. So those kind of things. And, and even before we started this, I was talking to one of my friends and he said he's a professor of one of the public universities in Mexico. And he was telling me like he was in the public transit to one of the one of the campuses, which is in one of the poorest parts of Mexico City, and someone can came, went into the bus with a gun and basically said, Hey, everybody give me what do you have. It's one of the poorest neighborhoods in Mexico City. How much money are they going to have? So, my friend just gave them their phone. And it said that it's criminals taking money out of the poor. And that didn't happen before. It was usually the crime didn't happen in poor areas, because the poor don't have, they don't have anything. So why would you not them? Now it's getting there. And now you see if you open a newspaper from Mexico, every day you have people killed somewhere at a party at a restaurant. So, going back for me and just living that it's kind of stressful."
Ol,"	My mom wants to come here when she retires. My sister, she's a writer. She's a freelancer so she can move anytime. And I don't know if they're going to do it. But it would be great. Yeah, I tell them. They're welcome. They told them like, you're welcome my home for not forever. But because it's a one bedroom. But at least you can stay here for a few months, and then we'll find something for you. And they know that. Anything I can do?, I’ll do it. I can support them with money or something. I'll do it. Yeah. I think it's more on my mom. I don't see it. I think her only concern right now is she loves her job as a teacher. And she loves her and she doesn’t speak English very well so she wouldn't be able to be a teacher here. Yes, a very good she she's in university. In actually the same in Brazil, my friend is works and she's a teacher there. And they just opened the Arts program and my mom is a writer and a painter. So, she's one of the ones that's opening the program and all that so, and for my mom, her professional career has always been very important. So, I think she would be quite dissatisfied if she did. I think she needs to complete her cycle. At some point. She's gonna say like, I'm done with university and moving here, but I need to wait for that. I can sponsor my mom, I cannot sponsor my sister. The only way that I could have sponsored, it’s another thing that I that's what I'm thinking that the Canadian cultures sometimes very conservative. The only way I can sponsor My sister is if I'm single, my sister single and our parents Dead."
Ol,"	No, no, I'm an atheist as a good leftist. So, I never then there was never involved in a religious organization, not NGOs. The only thing I did is when back so just 14 I started working here. So, I got this job at horizon where I'm working at. I started on March 2014, 2015. Yeah, I've been there, four and a half years. So, March 2015, I started working here, and I got fired from my other job, the HR HR job, I got fired on December 2014. So, between January, February, and half of March, I was under the Employment Insurance Program. Basically if you’re fired without cause there's a layoff or something like that. You can apply and They support you with certain amount. It's a percentage of what you're earning before up to a certain limit. Here's great because it actually, if I didn't have this, this is one of the things this is what I was telling you about taxes and if I hadn't had this, I think would be in Mexico right now. Because we were struggling. We were living on savings like be even even though my wife got a job look like it was a really bad job. Not a bad job was like an entry level job. Almost minimum wage. We had savings and and all that. Toronto is really expensive and you compare it any city in the world, but if you convert to Mexico, it's usually expensive, like back in Mexico. I had a two bedroom apartment and it was paying about, if you converted to Canadian dollars maybe like $400 in a really nice. When we got here we got a one bedroom in downtown for 1600 so it was four times and because that's that's one struggle that we had actually when we got here and actually I think I should mention when we got here we didn't know we didn't know anyone. So, when you apply for to be to rent, place they want you to get a warrant or because you don't have any credit score, any credit history anything. And because we didn't cover until we have to give six months, six months, six months rent. That's a significant amount of money. It was huge for us. It ate not half but about 30-40% percent of our savings. You get it back but promise that you you paid the deposit for. So you get the deposit here. And then this is a year, right? So, in theory, it's six months, right? But you need to create month one, month two, month three, month four, month five, and then the deposit starts counting here. So, you need to pay for six months and then keep paying the rent for the next six months. So, in the lapse of six months, you spent what you would be spending in a whole year. So, and that that sucks. Right now, one of my friends just moved here from his from he was living in Boston. And he was he just moved here, and they were asking you for four months in advance. So, I told him Don't do that. I'll be you want to just please don't destroy the apartment so spoke to me. But I helped him because it's ridiculous when you're moving from a country that it's not this expensive it just it just hurts. It hurts you really bad. We found an option with Scotiabank. Scotiabank has a huge presence in Latin America. So they had an option called smart drivers, it was some program. If you open an account in Mexico, you could move all your money without paying any fees or anything. So what we did we open an account in Scotiabank, Mexico, we just move all our money there. And then the week before we moved here, we just move all the money here. So we didn't pay any fees. That was great. That was one of those great things because if not, then we were basically screwed. That's another thing when I said that its conservative and, you know, elitist. Yeah, because you asking like, okay, you want to move here first, you get points because you have a university degree, you get points because you have experience working, you get points because you all that stuff, you come here to do this thing, you're young, and you need to have money to do this kind of things and all that. So that leaves most of the people who actually need to leave their countries behind. So, I was fortunate enough to have savings, to have a degree to have experience all that, that I was a good candidate for Canada. But if you live in Mexico and you're not by you know, you weren't able to go to school, you weren't able to go to private school and you don't have a good job, you’re screwed."
Ol,"	next steps like a generic next step like life, professional life, profession, and migration. Yes, I'm trying to apply in January for citizenship. And the reason is because in October, we it's two years. I'm pretty sure you know this, but if you were temporary residents before, you're going to remember, isn't it? You can get like a bonus one year from before. So it's one year from before plus two years and permanent residency. And the idea for me and my wife would be, so this up to so in January 2020 we want to apply for citizenship. So that's the migration thing. After that, I might stay here. I want to stay here. I would like to run every like the city. I really like the quality of life. But then again, it goes to who just saying like you. I love living in downtown, because it's super convenient. But so expensive. It says like, the problem with that is that it goes with what we were saying is that you need a, really, really good job which pays a shit ton of money. So it just goes around with I was saying like, if you have money then you get the best of the city, which I'm fortunate enough to have right now. I just think I've been really lucky with my path here. The job that I got the company I'm with when I joined over less than 20 people. Now we're like 60, and I was able to grow with the company. So, I started as a product manager. Now I'm a senior director. So I mean, I think that's, I was really, really lucky to get that. So that gives me the opportunity to live here to earn enough money to to enjoy Toronto. If you don't have any money, don’t have a good job, you have to live somewhere far like Scarborough and you need to take the Go train in the morning and you need to get here and youre commute is like an hour and a half. Know that. So those kind of things is it just goes back to what I'm saying about it's a really embracing culture in the lab, but it's still very elitist. You need money, you need studies, you need to be young, you need to be a certain type of person to actually enjoy the city. I never wanted kids. So this is now. So, as I said, January 2020, is citizenship. We're planning to buy a home maybe this year hopefully. We've been saving through to for example payment. Again, we want to live in downtown so it's even more expensive than I think so we're looking into I think, because we want at least a one bedroom apartment were you talking about like over half a million dollars so so I saw one that I loved was a two bedroom plus den, two bathrooms was a $1 million plus den. You know what, like the you know, like, for example this in my apartment is you enter here. This is the kitchen. Yeah. And we have a sink here and it's open and then you have kind of like the living room/dining room. And then we have a door here and then we have the bedroom and here is the washer. A den is basically a space where it's open. There's no door. And you can use it as a small office or guest room but it has no door. Okay? That's the definition. It's like, Yeah, yeah, it's gonna be mostly for us. So we're gonna be like a small office. Oh, that's what we're looking looking into it so we want to buy a condo. I wanted to be one bedroom, plus den. That's that's my idea. As I said downtown. That's something that I think we have enough money to for the down payment and start something that Let's see, this is really expensive. Professionally, I like my job. So I'm pretty sure I'm gonna stay there for a while. So I would say by professionally, there's no change. No change. But I'm doing side projects. So that's one of the things that have been missing. I started the podcast, yeah. And then continue with that. My goal is to interview 100 immigrants. Maybe after 100 I give up or not, but that's the goal. It's in two years. I wanted to meet 100 people. And I'm also writing. One of my short stories is going to be published soon. It's It's it's a parody of an immigrant from Mexico. So his name is Jesus because it makes it it's a very common name, but it's spelled Jesus. So, people make fun of his name because they know your name is Jesus in, in an Anglophone country, nobody's going to be named never gonna name the baby Jesus. Jesus is very company. He needs to explain love of Mexico that and then he is getting a job interview for an entry level job, but he's very stubborn and arrogant. So he doesn't want to get an entry level job. He thinks that he's the Big Shot. He's been a year without a job because he's looking for the top. Like, he's gonna He's going for the major leagues, but he doesn't have the skills and nobody wants to hire him. And then he gets divorced. It’s a take a very dark humour. Its being published by the immigrant writers association. So actually, if you listen to my first episode of podcast, I don't know if you listen to you listen to the first one. The first one, I interviewed the founder of that.  So it's funny because I started it just from college, I started taking a vacation program in creative writing. And I started writing that as, as part of the, of the school project. And at some point, I became a member of this association and they launched, they were asking for people to submit their stories for because they want to, they wanted to create the first anthology and it was going to be stories about immigration. Like I already have this. I just need to polish it and send it so I worked with some of my friends from school, polished it and sent it. They liked it. And it's gonna be one of 10 chapters in the book. I started writing of a young age, but I never pursue writing as a career. My mom is a writer, my sisters writer. So for me was just like, normal. I also take, I am like an amateur photographer as well. So, I do a lot of those kind of things. So yeah, that's, that's another thing. I'm going to continue pursuing my writing right now. Right now I'm writing a novel as well. So, I'm going to say novel. Yeah. Most of my short stories are like that. And like, I try to make people laugh, but my novel is a sci fi action dystopian novel. So it's a little different."
Ol,"	I could, um, yeah, absolutely. I just would do it a little different. I would. I would be, I guess, I guess the difference right now. I wouldn't be escaping from my country. So if I consider something now, I would think a little more and maybe don't go the way I came like, I left everything and lets see what life gives us here. I think if I move somewhere else I would be a little more careful and be like okay I need a job I'm going to go get a job and it has to be something that is really is fulfilling not like the first job I have something that's fulfilling and but I would consider I would completely consider moving and there's places that I would love to move. Mostly Europe, Europe, mostly UK. I would love to live in the UK. London To be honest, is my favorite city in the world. So that I haven't been so yeah, I would imagine it would be great. I've been there so many times. So many like three before four times. But it's still like you think about me like I I don't come from I my family's not wealthy. That also made the first time I left Mexico. I was 27-28 I never left my country and there was 28 years old."
Ol,"	Cuba.And then the next time I left was when I was I got married to my wife. And no, no, before we got married, we wanted to cruise to the Caribbean. So, the second time, and then we got more many more here and then I started traveling a lot. But what I'm trying to say is that traveling is are quite expensive. So I never did it when I was young. I never, I always dreamed about we're going to grab a backpack, I'm going to tour Europe with a bag, but I never did that. So now when I travel, I travel with a backpack but it's different because it's now because I know that I have a job that I'm coming back to a job at the time. It's like I'm just gonna grab a backpack in travel the whole whole Europe and maybe Asia for for a year and see what happens but never never did it. Yeah, but yeah, I would consider migrating but it just would be a little more. I wouldn't say careful because I think it was careful with me here. I think it would be more picky in the sense that it has to be a place that I really want to go, and I need to get a job I really want. And that's like kind of like I actually got a job offer a few months ago for the US, California, And I said no. Two things first, I didn't I didn't want I don't want to leave before I get my citizenship and also in the United States, and it's not a good time to be Mexican in the United States, even though I don't have Mexican. And my accent is, I have an accent but its not that Mexican-ish. So I will be okay. And it's California. I completely get it. But still the US. I don't want to live in a country where you have Trump as president."
Az,"	Love. My husband, hes here. We had the option of because I had a great career and focus on so we had an option for him to either keep coming down and visiting me while I was working in history in my career. But I just felt that that would be like, you know, we would have been like a year or two into our marriage and then I would move here and it would be like we're starting. I think it would just have mixed up our timeline. So I just decided to create a new year. "
Az,"	Yeah, no, my mom always knew that. I wouldn't like none of us lives in books. And my brother lives in London, UK. You have to say that here because it's London, Ontario as well. My sister lives in Melbourne. So, even when I moved to the States, she knew that I wouldn't probably go back to Pakistan. one in every continent. One in every time zone. So, my father passed away when I was seven years old. And I've been raised more by my mom single handedly. So I'm a product of hermevery way. So yeah, So I am…I am the closest to my mom. My brother, my sister. Left, got married left, got married and left when I was in my teens. my brother left when I just shortly after I turned 20 I think so. Yeah. So it's mostly just been me and my mom."
Az,"	Well, initially, when I came here, we had actually thought that I'd come here, I would have a look. And then I would still decide if I wanted to just go back. So the initial one was actually a visit. So I did come on a visit visa. And then when I came here, i came early summer, so that's a good time to come to Montreal. Just grew on to me, and then I contacted my work people and everybody and I was just like, I think I'm going to stay here. I don't think I'm going to go back. So and we just checked if it was legal for me to do that. And it was so that "
Az,"	Yeah, I did. I did do like when I was applying for the immigration initially, I did do the skills thing. So, I think I used to score something like, for Canada, I don't know what the minimum is. But it used to be something like 150 to 160 points, which was well above the average mean. So, I don't know what that means. If that answers your question. Okay, So in that sense, like, because I have a very diversified portfolio of work, so I don't have like, I don't I don't think I'd be able to say like, I have a skill in like carpentry or so but I do have like very strong editorial analytical skills. I have writing skills. I write a blog for one of these non-profits which works on mental health. I'm working with this other non-profit which works with foster children. So I helped to give them life skills such as just being a budget and you know, preparing the resume. So, I have those I have. I have mentoring skills. And so yeah, because I'm more of a generalist, it's something that I can I can fit in a lot of areas, basically. Yeah. So, I don't know, if I start to list them down. I feel like it's gonna be kind of like tooting my own horn. But also I know that it's multifaceted. Right so like I mean domestically I think it's I pretty much do everything I can I change the bulbs. I can I cook I clean? It's a Yeah, I don't think there's except for like heavyweight. I'm pretty adept at everything that goes on in our place. I'm also one of those people who changes like the electricity voltage things and like makes a three pin plug to a two pin plus do that stuff like that. So that and technologically I'm pretty good technologically just get it mixed up. So I like that's a natural inclination to it."
Az,"	I don't think I feel that too much because I just I was very independent when I was home as well. So if you like, yeah, my mom came to visit and that was good. She was here for a couple of months. And that flew by pretty quickly. So I feel like I was already living one person then now I'm still living with one person. It's just different in the sense that this person I'm getting to know more and more every day. Yeah. And because he's a guy and I feel like in all of my childhood, because my father also passed away pretty early on the only male presence, I had was my brother’s. And he also left pretty early on like when I was just 20. So I don't really remember much about guy habits. When I moved here I was very like, interesting to me. And I thank God that I have a brother because when I used to visit his house in London like over the summers I get I'd start to clean up this place and then I'd have to stop myself that I'm on vacation and I'm here to do this. So, women generally I feel like just have a natural inclination to be more organized and more clean or like keeping a place a pretty good. Yeah, so what I moved here like my apartment was full of boxes. And I asked my husband if he just moved in. And he said, No. And he had told me before he came that he was cleaning up the apartment and because the lease was ending, so I thought he packed it up. But it turns out, that's how it used to be like, forever. There was just boxes everywhere. And, and I also realized that he has a very different way of organizing things. So, this is the closet. It's a closet. Now, it doesn't matter if it's in the kitchen, or the room or the bathroom. It's a closet. So, you will find things which will be like, Why is this here? And then you realize it's a closet, it doesn't matter where it is. So, there would be things completely like the kitchen drawer would have like tools in it, and I’d be like shouldn’t this be anywhere else except here. so I realized like it was a bulb which went off in my head when I realized  that for him a drawer is a drawer. It's not where it is. It's just a drawer. It's a place to put things. So he, in general, he does agree that he's a bit weak at organizing, but he but for me, that was a completely new way. So I realized like, and for him, like, if it was messy, and he was fine, you know, he didn't really like even if it was a bit dirty. He was still fine. It didn't really matter to him basically. "
Az,"	Okay, so all right. So lets just make like...That's Africa. That is Asia.. Here is your Australia and I have no clue what North America looks like it says this big blob over there. So, here is my.. Botswana. Yeah. And then here would be Pakistan…here is going to be Philly and then we're going to move Montreal so those are the four countries well that's a city where I have lived in USA, Canada should be in red. Okay, so that's that's Africa. Yeah, Asia. So, in Botswana I was there for zero to seven years. Pakistan, I moved in 1992 to 2011 and then from 2013 to 2018. Philly is 2011 to 2013. Canada is 2018 to now. "
Az,"	Okay, so here [Botswana] it was not paid for. Yeah. Okay. And over here. This part is also not paid for [US]. Yeah, because you're Yes. And this part when I got to get here  - GRE. And the TOEFL. GRE is to get into any school and TOEFL is because even if you had an English medium education, you're going from Pakistan so they need to be able to tell. So at some point, though, I know that I did take the IELTS X 2. Once way earlier when I was thinking of immigrating to Australia in around 2009, I think okay. And once I took it right now, when I was thinking of coming to Canada So I was twice because that's a requirement for Yeah. And then when I moved to Canada, we consulted with the lawyer twice. But I did all the paperwork myself. So just a lawyer fee, which was, I don't know, $200 for 100 for every time so it wasn't too much. So yes, but every country I have visited in my life. Yes. Okay. Visits is equal to visas paid for. And that would be about – because it’s a Pakistani Passport. So I pay for every country's visa, right. So it's going to be at least.. I paid for at least like 30 countries..30 times. So that's a cost, but I have never consulted anybody for paperwork. That's only in Canada – background checks. Because of my immigration. That's all because to the US, I was on a scholarship from the US Department. So, I got waived for a lot of the costs than anybody else was going to the US to study…they would have many more of the loops and hoops. So, for me till now it's the lawyer, the police, The medicals, not yet, if they asked me it's not necessarily for everybody. When you do your PR it's a spousal one so it depends. Some people …they skip. Oh, yeah, I did do it. For the Australian visa I did do the medical test for the visit visa. No, they made my mom do it. Not me. "
Az,"	So, all of this - 1999 onwards is all tech dependent. If there wasn’t tech, especially in particular internet, I wouldn't be here basically. So what I use right now - let's go backwards because it's more fresh - Now I use Facebook for Canada spousal group, spousal support group. Its excellent. Nobody posts any junk on there. Then theres an online support group. These guys on online support group you can just post a random question and but you may or may not get an answer back I'm forgetting what the name is but it's anonymous support group “apply Canada immigration” something like that yeah some days it comes up as a first search what you do it. After moving here or even before moving here so always flights are always looked up online, flighthopper is a great tool, visa requirements are always looked up online, college applications, full bright application, undergrad, all of that work, Almost, except for the employments I created myself on the, job applications. Even like when you find your way just general maps Yeah. Kajiji for a lot of shit. Even if like right now like the blog I work for a link to community management stuff that I do. I helped organize it's all Online. So, it's because I'm new in the city and I don't know many people. So, everything that we are finding and my husband is more of an introvert he doesn't know a lot of people. So, everything I do is like, by going online, do it. So if I didn't, that's what I feel like I feel like if I don't even understand how women did this by doing these moves before us. Like I don't know what they went through because they'd write home a letter in the received one like a month later. So I just absolutely have this amazing respect for what they’ve actually been through. If you're depressed. Are you looking for something else? You do this? You know? That's where you turn to either. Just place a search. The world's at your fingertips? Absolutely. So for me if there's no net, there's no life, basically.  I mean, I met some people somebody, like, met through the net. I found like a job fair. I'm coming back and I'm going forward. So on the job for found one, I made one lead and went to one of their sessions. And that led to two leads. And that's how I think it goes through basically. So that's one and then one of the social works that I do. I found it was recommended by a friend who knew about them – Vent over tea. I love this place. Its mental health places. Basically, you go online, you book a venting session with somebody who's trained in active listening and you get an hour. I write a blog for them. "
Az,"	Oh, so first I was here at the YMCA for like two months and then I realized it wasn't helping me much. Then I joined one of the we works and that was all right. Now I move towards more government different places so I go to of archives national Quebec what's called a bank OBNQ. So, I go there for classes which are free once a week, which are only in conversation for French. And then I do at Dawson college, I go Mondays Tuesdays. The Dawson ones are not free, but they're almost like, what they asked for is very small. When I went to the summer, to the ones which the government offers, they told me my work permit did not qualify for it because it's an open work permit. But somebody I met just now. [Draws] This has saved my life. One of the persons told me that now they do accept it. So because she has just started it. So I feel like the meetup groups really helped. Again, I think if there weren’t meetup, I wouldn't have found a lot of people in a lot of places. The friends I did make though, I found them in my French classes. And so I just feel like the one or two people, friends in recommended, like, oh, you're going to Montreal. You know my sister lives there. And I was already a bit like, because I know me and my sister were poles apart. So, if somebody is her friend, most likely they're not gonna my friend and vice versa. Somebody who recommended me their sister and when I met her, I was just like, I'm friends with you, not your sister. I just it's not necessary. But another friend of mine, his sister moved here and we got along pretty good. So I think it has to do with the fact that he's a male and she's a female. "
Az,"	So I feel like I am a very independent person. I have always been a very independent person and everybody was, more than advice, everybody was very sure that I'd make friends in no time and then again, you know, I'd be on my feet. When I moved here, I thought I would need friends. But initially, I didn't want to be friends, like look up or go seeking friends. Like, I just wanted to be on my own. Because it was not just a physical, geographical change, but it was also change in my marital status. So I wanted to, you know, understand the dynamic of this relationship I was going to be in. Nobody hands you a JD for how to be a wife. What is it going to be like. And you just pretty mimic what your parents did. That’s the only training manual you have. So, I feel like it would be very helpful if my husband has been more supportive, okay. And I feel like he should have had some tools to help him understand what I would go through…for example, well, because he has his life going on here. And, of course, nobody's asked to reorganize all his life here. But he, to understand that his presence would be important, and in a meaningful way, not just being physically present mentally absent. So I feel like something like that would have been very helpful for me. And if he had, I do believe that if he had known about a resource like that, he would have reached out to me before I came, so that just give me an idea."
Az,"	My mom somebody who's like, I know that it didn't affect her, but she had, even when I was there, she had a routine. She has a very strong network of friends and family and she's she's…And she did 2 years without me any way. Two years without me when I was in the States. So she kind of like, already knew that. But the thing is, when I was in the States, she was still working. And she retired the year I got back. So, for her, but she still is very regimented. So, she’ll get up at a certain time every day. She has her whole routine. So even when I was in Pakistan, like, if I came back from work earlier, she was like, okay, you're home, but I have things to do. So, we're going to sit together at the time we sit together every day. So, like, and that was good to see because it just showed me that she's going to be fine without me and she is so she's a very, she's a she's a very strong and she's she's because she's so independent. She's always promoted us to be like, you know, raised us to be very independent individuals as well. "
Az,"	We did have to get like there was one stamp on our because we got our Nikanama in English as well. But there was one stamp in Urdu which we got translated. So, and the guy was like, very sweet. He's didn’t even charge us for it. We didn't even know him. We found him online. But he just said, we also wrote for him but the translation was, so he just had to stamp it. That was here. I mean, we did have to go through Of course, we had to do the PR papers, the PR paperwork and the work permit paperwork. "
Az,"	My PR is approved in principle. Its called AIP and work permit is to 2021 which means my extension to stay and stuff I have my driver's license, health card everything by now. It took it's time, but it's here now. The paperwork itself is this one is the worst paperwork I've done in my life. I could have applied to five universities in that one paperwork – that’s how much it was because we've been married for less of less than a year when we applied we had to actually prove that this was a legitimate real marriage. It wasn't just done for the sake for getting an immigration. So, we had to give them like photos and they have a cap on photos so we had to be really like smart about the kind of… we had to thik really out of the box in terms of what we give them.. like actual evidence so like we give them photographers contract for the wadding, we gave them permission slips for wedding shoots. The good thing about Pakistan is now that it's pretty becoming pretty regimented and people give you like receipts of the cake, the wedding catering, and everything. So, we had that, and  everything's in English. So we gave them the gym membership for here and then you know that we're both coming here together, opening a bank account they needed…they had absolutely required a joint bank account and me being on a Pakistani passport on a visit visa none of the banks was actually giving us that because they're just like, No, we don't give it to visitors even for joint, so that was like such a catch 22 because we just kept going round and round and I didn't even know which banks were here and then just searching that and thinking out of the box kind of thing. And I basically I think I thought of that only because I had lived in the US and I thought okay they should be able to give me a bank account based on my own nationality and sort of my visit visa and that's how I thought of like an International Bank. So this paperwork’s a bitch, I swear, we have had so many fights and doing this and almost when I went on the support group page, all couples have had fights doing this so we were thinking they should put a checkbox underneath and saying, how many fights did you have one completing this because you're not gonna do this for anybody unless you really love them to be honest. It's that bad. And even though I’m doing inland I think Outland I don't know how land is because you stay away from your spouse most likely for like two years and that is probably hell added on hell. For us because I was hearing a reason you can only set stay at six months stretch. So the deadline was approaching. So it was more like we do this or goodbye. So we were able to like keep our eyes on the prize in terms of like, No, we mean more than the paperwork. This is a mountain a molehill, and a mountain in the way, and because we've been another long distance relationship for six months before we got married, so we, we'd already done that, and we didn't want to go through that again. "
Az,"	I feel like in getting here I was pretty okay because I was already like, pretty sick of where I was and I knew that I had to move so in getting here there was not like, for me it wasn't an obstacle to choose like, Oh, you know I love this place too much and I cant give it up. It never felt like home to me and I was perfectly fine moving away. So, and surprisingly the only city in the in my entire life I've lived in four as you can see, and Montreal has actually felt like home pretty instantly. But I feel like the biggest obstacle I felt when I got here was because I have seasonal affective disorder. And the fact that the winter here is pretty harsh and as much as I love the winter actually, s.a.d, plus, my husband's I don't know, lack of awareness of I don't even know how to put it in a good way like, because I don't blame him for it, that's the thing and I don't hold it against him. But his kind of like the fact that his ignorance and him having a full load of work kind of like timed at the same time as winter hitting in, you know, so because his work is very seasonal. And this and the next semester are his main two semesters. So, I feel like his his business or his life carrying on basically which I cannot absolutely grudge the person or Yeah, so his business plus sad so the timing of that was probably like the worst combination. Yeah. And this year, like as it starts to become when you get close to winter, I almost dread it because it's almost traumatic to think that this cannot be a repeat of the last year. Yeah, right. So see, so a lot of people just say that we have winter blues. All right, okay. Right. But then people who have seen winter blues is something like almost everybody faces because the sun is nowadays are getting shorter to get less sun time and everything. But seasonal affective disorder is when people actually almost move into a depressive state. And you have to like, like I had learned to manage it in Pakistan as well because I would you know, up the ante on my physical activity and everything but here there were some essential vitamins which I wasn't aware of, and I should have started taking them…I should have started way earlier. So, I feel like that affected because they affect the chemistry of you. So that and the fact that you know, I didn't know anybody, so I didn't have a motivation to get out of the house. So, I mean, I mean, when it's snowing everybody wants to stay in any way. Right. And it's beautiful from inside, but I feel like it's beautiful outside as well. But if only if you have like, a purpose to get out, yeah, I just didn't have a real and like for me because I mean, I was living right here is a good thing and a bad thing. Because if I had to go to the gym, I would just run from there to here. Right. So I didn't even have to wear any winter gear on something. I just sprint and I'd be in here then I just went out. But I came here I went to the gym. I didn't really talk to anybody. And the fact that I had very low human interaction, and somebody like me who's extroverted really needs a lot of human interaction. So that and then so the human interaction factor, like very decreased and then the time zone change because everybody back home was like, 12 hours at a difference from you. Yeah so even if I go on everybody it like my friends and you know the fact that you know you you're not there and you see lives moving on basically. Yeah, you have that's the negative of Facebook, and social media that you're able to see things happening and you're not there. it's a con in that sense, the connection is not there. Like, your friends are meeting up the way they used to, like you see their stories. "
Az,"	Yeah, I think everybody was kind of like now that you mentioned like, I've never really thought of like any advice I got. But when you mentioned it, like, I don't think I got good or bad advice. I just didn't get advice. And I think that that itself is not a good or bad thing. Like it may be more of a bad thing, because I just didn't get any advice. I think I feel like either. Everybody just looks at me and thinks that knowledge. Yeah, because I've learned from a very young age to steer my way. So, either everybody's perception of me Is that she should be fine or are they just don't know what to say. So yeah I don't think. I feel like there should have been some something. I feel like my sister in law was had moved to London from to be with my brother. And she like only now like after a year she mentioned that yeah, it feels like you're just you're just reborn you have to do all these driving test again you have, you're basically starting your life is scratch and I feel like, something, a conversation along those lines with somebody would have been helpful. And any of his friends wives that I met, were also not too forthcoming. Now they are not earlier because they didn't know me, or they didn't know him too well. And they didn’t know what to say basically. So, so I feel like it would have, I just feel like there wasn't much conversation happening. That's why I'm taking notes because I am considering of building this on on a side of talk to one of these organizations as well, where I can actually hold workshops and have mentors and stuff. So I’m thinking of doing something for women who are or even men who are place like me. I feel like I've got like so much like, that's what my first blog was about, like how to prepare for the winter, that's exactly what it says. It's about winter blues, basically. But I there's a disclaimer about SAD at the bottom. So, it's basically trying to give those tips to people that I do do now and that have worked for me. Yeah, so it's so I do find a way to like, say those things and communicate them because I just feel like if I had that information, it would have been much more helpful for me. "
Az,"	I think my parents in law are not too keen because they have something which is called a super visa for Canada coz two of their sons are here. I have no clue what that means. I asked my husband and his brother multiple times, but none of them either knows what that means. But they just say it's a super, super visa. That's a really cool name for a visa. I know. This was a super powered visa. Yeah, so I have a super visa which I don't know what.. "
Az,"	No, I think going through all that stuff once in a lifetime is pretty much enough. "
Az,"	I'm not too sure if this is actually really reflective of all the things I have actually paid for. Okay, you know, and I think that's an important part because these things are expensive. It's not like they're not expensive. Yeah, you know, just the fees itself is very expensive for the paperwork. But like, I feel like so for me, something that I like about myself is that my education, my entire education, which is 18 years or so, has almost except for two years, it has all been free. So I think that is not like something which other people get. And good education especially right, like I went to an Ivy League school. Yeah, a private school like that. It's, it's so coming out of that debt free, you know. So, the only two years I paid for was two out of four years on my undergrad when I was not on scholarship. So, but I feel like if you don't have all of that education, you would pay much more for it. In all the things that I have done, and a lot of my trips have been paid for. Of the 30 countries I've visited, I didn't pay for those airfares. Most of them were paid visits, either through my work, or through my school or something else. So, because you're educated, you know how to get things. You know what I mean? Like if you want something but you don't have the money at that time, but you have a very big asset, which is education and awareness. And you find somebody who's gonna pay you to do that. I really wanted to go back to Botswana. After like 20 years, having left it as a child. And I went to Penn, I saw the Penn as a Penn and Botswana partnership. I applied for the summer internship and I could have checked all the countries in the world on that actually, and I only checked Botswana and I said, this is the only one I want to go to. If not, I'm going to stay back and I had two internship offers in Philly and I said I'd stay back and I do that. And then they contacted me and said your waitlisted, not shortlisted. Would you like to be waitlisted? I said to myself, hmm waitlisted means no, but I said, I'll take that chance. And, and that's what happened. Somebody jumped out and I made it, you know, I went. So, my 3 months over there were paid for it. You know, so what I'm just trying to say is somebody else would have to pay much more, even if I paid for those visas in many cases. I didn't. even pay for the visas. It was coming from somewhere else. So, I'm just saying that this cost is not reflective of more than average people. This is like an outlier in terms of cost. My brother in law he has, I don't know if this will help you in any way. But he's working on internet for all access, like his mission is to make the entire world have free access to internet, based in San Francisco, and he went to the US on the “genius visa” was the genius visa. It's given to Absolutely exceptional people is a very few brother in law as in your brother in law, my husband's sister's husband, husband, sister's husband, okay. So he, he is he actually is a genius and he was he works with all the start-ups and everything inbox on as well. And so kind of uses like he's our age, but he is a phenomenally inspirational person. That's amazing. So that is his goal. And this this awareness is something that he brought to me that a lot of people, a lot of things I do is only because I have access to internet Yeah, just not having access to them, but also knowing how to use it. Absolutely. So that is an absolute privilege…that's why I just wanted to like give that disclaimer at some point that of the GRE, I took the GRE four times. How many times did I pay for it out of pocket, two times? The only trip I paid for, for the first time in my life was my own Umrah trip in 2009. Before that, I'd been to the US to Nepal to like, other Australia, all these other countries that I'd gone to. They're all paid for by somebody else. And after that, as well, I have there are very few trips in my life I've actually paid for. "
Az,"	No, I think he's travelled to he's lived in more places than me. Yeah. Like he lived in more places like within Pakistan. He lived in, I think three or four cities in okay. In the US, he's lived in more than that. But I have travelled the US more than him. Like I've travelled at least 20 states in the US. He hasn't travelled as many states even though he’s lived longer than me. Even in Canada. I have visited more places than him. Some of the places he’s visited, I haven't like Europe. Yeah. Um, but apart from that, in general, I have visited or travelled much more than him.  "
B,	I want to work abroad and I would like to improve my English and this is one of the only country where I can work with my French Diploma. So I tried to come here. 
B,"	Yeah, but Spain, but economical situation was not good for me. So I choose Canada before I would like to go to America, New Zealand, Australia, but I can't work with my French Diploma. I have to go back to school and to play a lot. So Canada, it was easier. So, I chose Canada. I can just come and work with my French Diploma. I am an Osteopath. There is some more and more French Osteopaths in Canada because it's the place where we can work with our French Diploma. I just have to have an association here from my French diploma, but its like a separate subscription. And I'm just going to work with my French diploma. So it's really good because the French schools are really good for Osteopathy than in Canada. I think, maybe not. Better. I don't. Those are better or not. But it's recognized a lot in France so it's easier for us to come in Canada to be French and to say hey, I'm an Osteopath."
B,"	really easy. In fact I have two person in my school who was where working there two years ago during their visa and in January I contact the girl and say hey I my visa which work in Canada work as an Osteopath. And she explained me everything and then she told me we left with my boyfriend in July and we are working in two clinics. So if you want a place, we just have to contact the business and interview with them. And if everything is ok, you have a job. So really easy for me. When I arrived in Canada, I already had the work so and so the interview was like online with FaceTime. "
B,"	About the work if everything is going good with the work if I have loads of patients, if I feel good with my work if I feel good in just in the city, if I have friends it's all about the life. Like, you know, I have my friends in France. My family there, so Im really happy to be there. If I can have friends here and like a family me and if I feel comfortable in my life, I think I will stay. Maybe not for all the life but for a while. "
B,"	I think I learned that with people at school I think. Well, because I was always interested to work abroad. My brother did. Working holiday visa going to Australia And he really liked it. So, yeah. At the beginning, I would like to go to Australia because I saw all the pictures and photo and I say, Wow, I want to go there. But it was impossible for me, for my for my work. So I think then I did a lot of search on the internet. And there is a website, a French website already good one to a lot of information about the working holiday visa. And then also on the website of immigration, Canadian, immigration, but more on the other side. I just know that I didn't want to go to Montreal and Quebec because there was too much French people and I don't want to be only with French people and then I didn't decide Toronto. I only decided because I have a work and it was easier for me. So whatever the country, if I speak English it doesn't matter for me but Toronto it's a really good city for what my job but there was a lot of stuff to do. It's not so far from America. There is a good airport if I want to travel so it's a good combination. Actually, I work in two clinics, so I decided to live at the middle. But I am at 25 minutes with the subway as a street car so it's it's not so far and I am a junction triangle. And it's on the line too. And I'm five minutes away from the subway."
B,"	In websites. Only websites. I discovered co living. I know that I would like to have roommate, to not live alone at the beginning and to make meeting people easier. Yeah. So I discovered co-living. And I also know that I didn't want to buy a lot of furniture for my apartment. So, it was a really good find because everything is new, and I just have to pay for my food, and everything is included in the price for the apartment. So, it was really good for me, but now I meet my roommate, and it's everything is really good. And maybe we are going to change to pay cheaper, because it's a little expensive, but to start, it was the best decision for me. But now that I met my roommate, maybe we are going to change apartments for another one, less expensive and maybe in the same place, but other apartment. "
B,"	I make my subscription in December and I got the answer in January. You just have to go on the website on the immigration website. Yeah. And you just say like that - I want a working holiday visa. What kind of work I have to do and then I just have to wait. It's a randomization. I don't know the word in English. So it’s a draw. So there is lots of people and not so many place. Little by little Canada open more places because they want lots of people to come. This is for France. Yes. If I wanted to go to Australia, I just have to pay and go. But for Canada, It's a draw. So sometimes people are waiting for years and never drawing. And I just made my subscription in December and one months after I get it.  So, it was really fast. Lucky draw. So, it's just about chance. It's not about your work that's about your education. So, there is an age it's 35 but You just have to sit and wait you're lucky like me you get it if not you're still waiting. So, I was very lucky. And then after getting my visa we have lots of paper to do like to give information about me, about my family, even my brothers, my job so I have to make medical visits because I have to work with babies and lot of patients so I have to pay expensive for this visits. So, I needed to go to a different province for my visit [medical]. I need to go to Leon for my biometrics, yeah, it was step by step. And I think in April, it was done. I just have to wait for when I want to go, so it was really fast for me. [The draw] Because there was too much people. I think I did in September 19, I did one subscription for Canada. But it's only I think we were around 8000 but its on this day, four place for the last session. So, I did it again in December. And I think if you check now maybe there is still 14,000 people. But now there is not place anymore."
B,"	Spain, I always want to go there because I used to go there every year for holidays. All right, okay. But sometimes I work there just for friends and, and really open with Osteopathy. And I, I like the weather, well, I like Spain, So I think one day I will try to go there. But first I want to enjoy my visa in Canada. And if I say five years in Canada, it doesn't matter. I still can go to Spain. First I enjoyed Canada and then I will see what I am going to do."
B,	Yes. During one year. And it was really cool for me because I did a replacement of pregnant woman pregnant Osteopath. So I worked for us during six months from January 18 to June 18. And I leave at the end of June for Canada. First I travelled to around America and then I arrived here. I did one week in New York and then I go to Boston to visit my brother's for one month and I really enjoyed it. 
B,"	Courageous?... determinate? Feel Free.. [laughs]. Yeah, I feel that it's about making a decision when you make your decision after you are exciting and you just have to go. So, but since always, I would like to work abroad. It was not so difficult for me. Lot of people say, Oh, you're crazy to go alone and to leave all you have to start again from zero. But I needed that because I can’t stay in France anymore. I was boring. So, I would like to see another country so it was very easy and I don't seem that I need something special in my character. I just wanted to leave it. "
B,"	Before Coming in Toronto? So, I think first Spain because its my lovely country and I will write here, like, I was on the point to live in New Zealand. I was I it was difficult for me to find working friends. I only do some replacement but only for a few days. I was with very boring in France and I told to my mother That's okay. I can't find a job in France. I'm losing my time. I always want to work abroad, I can work as an Osteopath in NZ, but I can make my subscription for Canada and waiting for drawing. But in the meantime, I can go to New Zealand to work and to improve my English. So, in it was a Wednesday I was on the point to make subscription for NZ, It's like Australia - just pay and go and I said no, I will do that tomorrow because I want to do that quiet and very. Yeah, just quiet because there was a lot of paper and lot of stuff. I don't want to make any mistake. So I wait for tomorrow and tomorrow, I get an answer for was a work I did in January and she said, Okay, I want you so you're gonna work and start in January. So I said, Oh my God. So I wasn't supposed to leave."
B,"	So most important problems at its people in Canada are more open minded. In France it's a generic. But in France, for example, you will see each patient only three or four times in a year, but because they are not reimburse a lot. But because in Canada, there is big insurance and I see each patient maybe every two or three weeks, sometimes more. It depends. But I see a lot of patient every two weeks. And at the first time it was very strange for me, because when they say actually, “when should I come back?” I say “oh, come back. Three to Six months”. Like in France I say. And they are like “Oh, okay”. And I saw that were not happy because I think if I say three or six months, they consider that I don't want to be to take care of them. So now, I do like everyone andI just said, “if you want to come back in two or three weeks, it's okay for me”. But for that I have to adapt my practice. I don't do the same. If people come back in two or three weeks, then if they come back in six months, I don't do the same. It's not about techniques, but it's just about how I see my practice now. I adapt myself, for people in Canada. And I think if I go back to France, I have to adapt again for people in France. So it was very different, but I don't prefer France or Canada for that. Its just different I just need to adapt. "
B,"	Yeah ofcourse. Okay since the beginning, my best friend because I made 10 years ago and since the beginning to those that I want to work abroad and since the beginning she say, “okay, no problem. You can go and nothings gonna change between us and I've seen we are more close now that Im in Canada, because as a beginning, I saw That okay with the jet lag of six hours. Maybe I'm not gonna be able to write to you every day to answer you every day because of my work because of the jet lag because of my life. And actually, we are all we speak every day with WhatsApp with vocal message. It's easier. And yes, really we are more close now than ever. And, of course my family, and mother. Of course my dad but I don't have the same relationship with him and my brothers.  I have two brothers. So the one who lives in Boston Well, we're more… I am close with my two brothers but it was easier for me to speak with Gayle because he’s in Boston and he also left home. So, I will Gayle first. And he was there “just to tell me it's gonna be okay. You can go Yeah, I can do it. Yeah of course because I was alone. Yeah so it's and, and I'm alone and I'm a girl so it's not difficult I seen it was not a program for me. Of course I think about that because I'm a girl but I feel so much insecurity, here than in France. So, I really feel comfortable now with that. And my brother move with his wife and his daughter, so yes, he moves to Boston but he is not alone. If he needs to support he can just go home and he has support. If I need support I have to call my best friend and it is not the same. Im alone. Of course I met some people here but I will not tell them all my problems and my difficulties. So, "
B,"	arriving here to be alone. All the month of August was difficult, because I don't have a lot of patients. So, I didn't work a lot. I stay home and of course I go outside but I go outside because I told myself okay, you have to move and not to stay in. But if I go to the gym, people don't speak because they are in their own routine I did a lot of stuff. I go to the beach, but alone it's not the same. And I have a big apartment and I was alone because my roommate was not there. So yeah, it was to be alone – in every part – work, at home, outside. Now I feel better after one month. I feel better.  I feel safe in Toronto more than France because when I was studying in Lyon, if I were as well, I don't wear skirts, but a short.. just a short. I know that I will have some… I don't know the word.. well I can't wear what I want in Lyon. I always was thinking about oh, what's going people say, because I'm wearing wearing a short or a skirt? Because they are crazy. They are not open minded and if a girl has a short, it's means that she wants for example sex. Lyon is a big city, but it's like…. it will be the same in Paris. There is types of people of course, but in Lyon it was very difficult sometime because I go.. I will were short and I know that I will have some words on the streets and everything. When I have insults of some people, it was from one community, but you don't have that in Toronto. I can wear what I want. I can make up as I want, I can go to city in a bikini if I want, I will not have any insults or remarks. If you do that in France, Oh my God. Do you know scum? Like that community? That's it was very strange because sometimes you go in a place and you will not expect you to have some insults and you do. So, if at my parents home, it's a small city, so it was not all the time, just sometimes. But in big city if you go to some place, you know that you are not so safe. I really feel safe here. So for example, I go to a party for And if I have to take the subway at midnight, I was uncomfortable and I was always check behind me. I have to wear my air pods. But without music just to show that people that I can't listen, but actually I listen if something happened. In Toronto, I just came at midnight Thursday, and I feel really safe. No they don’t. May be they want because maybe they miss me. But especially my mom, because I'm very close to my mom. But if my mom knows that I'm up here and if everything is going well, she will never ask me to come back. I have news for all my family maybe every day because we have a group on WhatsApp and it's really easy now with the technology. So it was not like years ago, but they are coming just to visit me to to see how I live, where I live, where I work, and how is the city just to discover my new life. But they  are really happy for me so they will not ask me to come back home.  "
B,"	About my working holiday visa? Yes. So the French people of my school especially, and one of the friend of me, because she wants to leave France too, but she want to go to Montreal, but I just explained to her like you have to make a subscription online, you have to pay this. And you can't. You can't find a job before, its only if you're lucky, but it's easier when you are here. And some people like school asked me, How did I get a job and how is the life in Toronto and how I feel. So I give them some advice as they want to come. But first, they have to get the visa in the first place and finish school. just sometime when on Facebook, some people ask if I have the answer, or we tell, but I don't go specially on a group or on a website to give advice. Just if I see on my page on Facebook, if people are asking for some stuff I will say. But not specially. "
B,"	I felt really good. But actually, I don't… I work in 2 clinics. One clinic I see is there is there is maybe eight rooms… there is naturopath, massage therapists, acupuncturist, psycho therapies. But if I have a lot of patient and if they have lot of patients, I don't see anyone. I just cross them in the clinic but that's all but everyone is really kind. Sometime we make some after work plans together and the evironment is very good and peaceful and I feel really comfortable. The first time I arrived, my boss said, Okay, we're going to do some shop. I want you to feel comfortable in your room. So we have bought some pictures put on the wall. And I said, Wow it will never appear in France. No. So it was really I feel really comfortable and at my ease. And it's the same in the other. And if I have patient most of the time, I see only my patient. Sometimes I go see my boss if she's not working. But I'm really good and at my ease in the two clinics."
B,"	To move and to work there? maybe Netherlands? because I got family in Netherlands and some friends, but I don't speak Dutch but speaking English, so I suppose that my English will be better in few months. So it's not gonna be a problem and ready open minded I goes a lot there…well, not a lot of time but sometimes and people are really kind. And I know that I can feel comfortable there. Except Netherland, in Spain. if I can work in Australia, why not. And for Australia, if I can’t work as an osteopath, maybe I can do something else. Yes. It's not a problem for me to try anything else and maybe just a break of six months or one year to discover something else, to discover another country and a new job, I think still in the care of people but something else. Australia, Netherlands, Spain. "
B,"	No, I just got some question of French people who are the permanent residence. The only thing I know is sometimes very long to get one sometime it's short. And it's not regarding your work or your age or anything. It just about being lucky. So some people need one year to get ones some of those, It was only three months. And I know that it's a little expensive, but it's only stuff I know."
